House of Leaves (SPOILERS)




p122

The supposed commentary on The Navidson Record, which Zampano cites through footnotes, belie how absurdly complex this story had supposedly become in the eyes of the media. It gives the impression of a veritable avalanche of media documenting this one record, with whole essays written on the most minute detail; an entire world bent on picking apart every single iota of nuance that one could possibly hope to analyze. Halloway’s words spawn an essay, but his facial expressions in the same scene spawn another. As though the importance of the world, of understanding the core of the universe, could be discovered if only humanity collectively spent all academia effort of analysis and critique on this one documentary through every lens that could feasibly or infeasibly be applied.

It is a startling depth of critique on the characters within that seems most striking, and at this point, it is as though it is building to a veritable avalanche of voices all picking apart the story. This (~p122) is when the book structure truly starts to fall apart. There were certainly oddities far before - strange footnote symbols, odd structuring within the SOS passage - but they were tame and introduced tentatively, almost lovingly. We now reach a point where the sheer number of voices and passages clamoring to offer their insight on this piece drowns out the actual piece itself.

There are whole “footnotes” - at the bottom, crammed into the margins, or even violating the text as an out-of-place square through which ramblings appear, that are simply contextless lists - two pages of supposed photographer names, a bleeding-square continuity of a list of power supplies, an upside-down list of places? names? entities?

Truant ends up being our only tie to “the real world”, as virtually all other voices are confined to this academia hell, the metaphysical structure of which is as labyrinthine as the house it is all critiquing. And even he is semi-lucid, caught in the dream state of sex and poetry.

The story seems less and less to appear as just The Navidson Record, and more and more as some grotesque show of how far-reaching the connections from said record can be made to other ephemeral literary points

I REALLY fuck with the square footnote window on pages ~120 to probably like ~130 or something. The fact that you read the words backward through the other side of the page. It feels like the book itself is emulating the turns of the Navidson house, with an unprecedented 3-dimensional wall break as part of the textaisde is no longer at the bottom or side of the page, but rather is coming upwards, forwards, THROUGH the pages, like a cutaway hallway that slices spatially through the air. It is really remarkable.

In general I really fuck with how this book falls apart. This whole sections feels so succinctly like a breakdown in the sense of the book as so many different voices fight to make themselves hear, fighting over the same territory of the pages.




~p153

The voices and literature labyrinth have stopped. All the voices have gone, although with a sense that they have only travelled to some other place rather than stopped talking. There is never a sense that the analysis ever shuts up, only that it leaves ones line of sight, one’s range of hearing. The story, the documentary on The Navidson Record, is hesitant to come back. Wide swaths of nothingness coat the pages. The doc is still waiting for these voices, learned helplessness keeping it confined to a small part of the page to appease the territorial urges of those no longer present.

There is something really striking about the effects of reading genuine and insightful critiques and analysis of the story in-line with the story itself. It’s like the entire catalogue of text, of all kinds, wants to remain impervious to any additional outside analysis. On page 166, we are not only introduced (properly) to the concept that the house changes it’s shape according to the mental state of those within it, but we then get salient examples and explanations for how this very concept manifests in the story. There is little to no time for the reader to generate this theory by themselves, much less apply it. The story has an incessant need to “get there first” and not only thoroughly analyse whatever there could be to analyze, but provide references to multiple in-depth essays that explain it even further.

As such, someone reading this book is relegated to the complete outside; we can only comment on the nature of there having already been all this analysis, rather than joining in on the analysis ourselves. We cannot find meaning within The Navidson Record, there is no room left for extra interpretation; we can only find meaning within the sight of the innumerable analytic leeches suckling on its every exposed surface.

We are simultaneously brought through the literary equivalent of the physical labyrinth being described - with intertwining footnotes cutting laterally through pages and recursively referencing themselves in a maddening mess of every critical lens you could possibly think of - while also being forced, somehow, to deal with it ourselves without help, entirely on the outside, and alone. There are no voices here commenting, or even aware of, this tangle of footnotes. The Editors are our only real companions here, somehow, but they are incredibly limited both in frequency and application. Truant is our only tie to “the real world” that this story takes place within, if it can be called that, but he is so totally lost within that world that it seems less like a comfort to and more of an abrupt break, giving us view into an entirely different timeline and dimension.

…

Also worth noting. I previously picked out the main narratives; Truant, The Navidson Record, Zampano’s analysis of the doc. And there are of course innumerable smaller ones. I would also like to point out the most obvious; the narrative of House of Leaves. The narrative from Mark Z. Danielewski himself, present in the structure of the words, the pacing of when and how each smaller narrative touches each other.




p179

Truant self-describes the convoluted entries as a labyrinth; once again, the book refuses to let the readers stake personal claim to any analysis without also weighing in. The book has also just all but confirmed that the labyrinth of the house changes according to the mental state of those within it. Truant talks about wanting quiet, clarity, and space after entering that labyrinth of an entry. Are the physical empty spaces in the surrounded pages not a manifestation in the literary labyrinth of Truants mental state? Or, mental wishes?




p300

Truant takes 5 pages of passionate fevered narrative to describe the same feelings as Navidson had, whose “sn -a- ps” takes only 5 letters across 3 pages.




p316

I also find it so fascinating how the book ultimately refuses to - cannot - show the one central thing that every one of its sprawling narratives is seeded from; the documentary itself. It’s critiques, analysis, and twisting tangential narratives are all informed by their relation to the documentary - to the essay describing it. The doc itself, inside the essay, is said to be important enough that there need be no analysis of the doc, and instead the doc as a whole should be mounted and shown as the message itself. Many critiques are on the visual quality of Navidson’s angles and camera shots; when the author cannot fit in more structural and stylistic meaning into the makeup of the words, the meaning spills into the content. As wonderful as the conclusions and analysis sounds, and as much as it must surely be true, we in a PURE sense can never know what it being commented on. We never see those “rushed angles, specially chosen by Navidson” or the “expertise evident in his shots”. As though, as one final “gotcha, you’ll NEVER be able to look at the center”, they make the medium of the thing being talked about something so fundamentally different from the medium of the essay, the book, describing it. A book with a huge empty muse in the middle. A paper with a huge empty black square in the center. A labyrinth made out of hallways being emulated, exact to the feeling, in literature and words, though all directed on the hallway that can fundamentally never be seen. We are forced to interact with the Navidson Record obliquely; through the countless subjective lenses of articles, comments, opinions, and lives twining around it.




p346

 The book adamantly refuses to respect the sanctity of analysis. Already my analysis of the book - of the story’s insistence on describing with literature that which is fundamentally visual (in other words, the fact that we the readers see absolutely everything related to The Navidson Record besides the record itself) - is parroted from within the book itself, as it comments on the nature of games of experiential telephone as ultimately compounding distance and distortions that reduce the accuracy of representation and the original experience meant to be portrayed.

 Bad phrasing. In another way: the book points out the distance between tom’s broken fingers and the fourth-hand way that the audience finds out about them (reston recalling navidson’s recounting of his own subjective experience of seeing tom’s hurt fingers…) as a way to parallel the fact that we are just as far removed, in a similar fashion, from the doc itself. We are (when buying into the world) reading Truant’s conglomeration of Zampano’s cobbled together literary essay of other people’s disparate analyses on the fictional Navidson Record, a video that we fundamentally can never and will never see.

 We never can see the record; we never can see the center; of course; that is the point. There is no center to the house’s labyrinth - there is no minotaur lurking at the center, that’s why all passages related to it are crossed out. It would be easier if there was. There is no “thing” to look for in the maze, however much we want to believe that the growling belies the existence of some “center” to it all. There is no center to any representations of the house; they are all blank black boxes. There is no center to the book House of Leaves; the “center” is the Navidson Record, and that is the one “thing” in the book that doesn’t actually exist. We can never and will never see it, not in the real world and not even within the book’s world and not even would it be possible for us to behold it if it DID exist because the Record is a video while the book is a book.

 All we can see as evidence of this “center”, as evidence of “The Navidson Record”’s existence, is an insurmountable amount of analysis and critiques that SURELY must mean that the record is real, why would so much be said about the Record if the Record didn’t exist? And there is no “center” to life, if I am to make the jump as to what any “takeaway” from this book may be - there is no objective meaning to search for in life, just like there is no minotaur to search for at the center of the house. We only have countless countless countless perspectives from the world around us talking ABOUT the meaning of life, talking ABOUT the center, that we assume that there MUST BE a center, just like how there is so much analysis and critique OF The Navidson Record - in any which fucking way anyone would EVER care to analyse it - or, the illusion of it’s existence is so convincing - that it feels like there MUST BE an actual Navidson Record doc, video doc, that one could watch.

 Idk the exact quote, but again, I am reminded of when the book self proclaims that some say that The Navidson Record need only be shown by itself, with no accompanying analysis, and that the doc would BE the message that needs to be told. An awfully ironic statement to make considering that among all the words and thoughts surrounding the doc, the doc itself is the only thing that doesn’t exist.

 //////

 I have gone back to try to find the passages relating to a center. I found one, although I feel I am missing the one I wanted. Nevertheless:

 > This is why classical thought concerning structure could say that the center is, paradoxically, *within* the structure and *outside* it. The center is at the center of the totality, and yet, since the center does not belong to the totality (is not part of the totality), the totality *has it’s center elsewhere*. The center is not the center.
 p112
 >

 And, of course, the passage I set out to find, although finding it does not provide as much help as I thought:

 > ( writing on ”experienced or concrete space” )
 It has a centre which is perceiving man, and it therefore has an excellent system of directions which changes with the movements of the human body; it is limited and in no sense neutral, in other words it is finite, heterogeneous, subjectively defined and perceived; distances and directions are fixed relative to man…
 p169
 >

 Ironically it is here that I feel elaboration on how these quotes relate to my previous analysis is redundant. Hopefully you can figure it out for yourself. Suffice to say, there is no non-experienced or non-concrete space, which is the common portrayal of the fictional center of totality. “The totality” being easily metaphor’d to mean the totality of analysis surrounding the center that is the navidson record, the totality of subjective experience surrounding the center that is “what life is supposed to be/what life means”, etc.

 I find my analysis of the book like this to be comfortingly meaningless - ultimately doing nothing but adding to the voices discussing The Navidson Record, the point of which is that they are (this is) not the point.

 …

 I cannot help but clarify though, so; to codify the relation of the second quote to the conclusion drawn from my earlier analysis, at the risk of ruining the delicate and nuanced nature of the connection with the brutish fingers of language;

 The first quote is p straightforward in how it relates to the preceding analysis. The second quote says no more than this: if we take the first quote at face value, if we accept that there is no center, there is no objective center to life, then we are each left with only our own subjective experience, centered entirely and only on ourselves. This subjective experience, which WE are at the center of, where our own unique and incomplete experience of “the world” , IS “the center” we so try to find, and it is perfectly suited and personalized for everyone. We both have to (in a reductionary sense) and have to (for what else could we hope for it to be?) trust only our own individual experiences of BEING the center

 Finite - because we only know our own personal experience.

 Not neutral - we each do not have an objective truth, it it only our own small very subjective truth

 No wonder THIS quote makes no sense to Truant, despite it being perfectly finely written. Truant is not about to accept that his own experience is true, whole, and complete for only and exactly his purposes. /// if the second quote is nothing more than the conclusion that follows from the first, then it makes sense at this point in the narrative that Truant cannot understand it because he doesn't believe the premise of the first; he is infatuated with the idea, however asbtracted away and hidden as this urge may be, to find the center of his own life; he has unerring belief in the center of the totality and his yet-unacknowledged quest to find it. Or at least, here and in the ensuing pages, we watch his struggle as he begins to realize there is no center even as he still acts to find it.

 …

 Second quote as nothing more than description of the world that is the logical consequence of the first quote. We, each of us individually, are the totality, many subjective totalities, surrounding the false center than is the “objective experience”, even as again each of us individually are both the center of our own totality and, to that extent, no center at all but simply the totality itself

 yes!




 p414

 My favorite conception of the house by far is in comparing it to the blind spot in the eye caused by the connection of the optical nerve, and furthermore, “a place of processing, of sense-making, of seeing”. I’m not sure whether, in the analogy, the world around the house is the eye or the brain.




 p418

 I think I am jealous of Will Navidson. He is alive, and is recognized for a self-taught skill borne from passion. *I* want that.




 p424

 SO enamored with how the author has decided to frame the text when someone is inside the house. Exploration 4, the text becomes convoluted and crowded, incredibly filled in, many voices talking, during the part that everyone had just entered. The space feels claustrophobic. As people die, are left, the entries clear out but remained deformed. There are less people in the house, and thus less narratives fighting in different text blocks, but those that exist are still strangely formatted and pushed to the side. And now, all this time later, as soon as Navidson enters the house again, the text begins to narrow. I am so in love not only with the fact that the author is doing all this strange formatting, but that yes it DOES have a tie with the text, in a metaphor, in analogy, in 3 or 4 different unspoken threads talking back and forth from writing structure to narrative plot to audience positioning to what are clearly just points of view the author finds interested and so incorporates into the story, and/or bends/builds the story around.

 Oh btw case in point p427 vs p430. Both are simply text at the bottom of the page, but in the first the empty space is explicitly felt as solid, whereas in the second it is explicitly felt as empty, simply because of the meaning of the accompanying text. Fucking awesome. mark just wanted people to analyze his work like he analyzed the navidson record - no, that’s not fair. He clearly made this because he’s the only one that could




 LOL WHY IS THE NAME OF THE BOOK DROPPED AS A PLOT ITEM??? WHY DOES NAVIDON HAVE HOUSE OF LEAVES AS A BOOK?




 p526

 Ok, so I’m meant to understand that the main character travelled to the center of the abyss and took out House Of Leaves, at this point the central symbol for all that cannot be symbolized, and all the desire to symbolize it anyway, and BURNS it? IN the center of the abyss? And in doing so, sees external LIGHT from another source for the first time in the abyss? This is some CRAZY workkk

 …

 Many different simultaneous ways to tell the story of the killing? The killing of the baby. The killing of the book in the abyss (Navidson). The killing of the book in the abyss (Truant). The killing of Navidson’s power over Karen. A purge. I suspect that truant will not show up again for the rest of the book?




 p543

 A story of creating something through killing? Of ending a reign. Of killing a past - current - version of yourself to let a future - current - version of yourself live on, wiser.




 p657

 Having (mostly) finished, I now in retrospect ascribe a sort of love on the part of the house. I see love in the makeup of its black walls and reaching nothing.

 //////

 It loves the occupants, and those that enter it. It is nothing to them but honest, genuine, sincere.




 So many, so so many, stacked layers in this book. I am sure I will write a better review than this soon, or one day, but for now I have only this. An amazement for all the stacked parallel stories (Jhonny dealing with the mother, Navidson dealing with the house, Karen dealing with life, and countless others) that all mirror each other into essentially a really well curated Vibe of a passage through some sort of story rather than any particular story itself. This, and a feeling that to be “obliterated by the center of the house” is to feel love, truly, for the first time.




 His mother’s notes are really what struck me. Particularly in that even she too follows the same road to a quiet self-killing in the middle of n abyss to come back. It’s not known, probably on purpose, how mentally unstable she actually was; if the entries after that one very illiterate entry are really her having a moment of lucidity, or if she is delusional or even dead, or if both, or if the answer even matters.

 I think Danielweski’s portrayal of the house as, to give an arbitrary specific and reductionary take, what mental illness or a depressive spiral feels like (or really any spiral, journey, because what journey doesn’t change even as we traverse it?) [sic]. The house changing, shifting - and the somewhat heavy-handed and explicit “it’s reflecting their mental state woooaaahh” note - is just a very succinct and apt way of portraying it. Of course the emotion of the nameless nostalgic terror that accompanies a journey like this should be noted too, as well as the theme, I don’t know if Danieleski intentionally planted this seed or if I am just associating it by myself or if it even matters - which is the answer I’m sure Danielewski himself would give - but I feel a sense of love from the house. I feel that the house loved Navidson, and even as terrible as the entire journey felt, I know Navidson felt loved by the house.

 Anyway, the original point: a pointing-out of the theme that not only does this house exist as a concept of a journey, but also the idea that to deal with such a journey required travelling to the very depths of the abyss and killing something - a part of yourself, or a complete metaphorical/mental suicide - to allow a more grief-laden yet wise part of yourself continue - is very poignant.

 It also makes me think of how it’s often assumed, or it’s “in the air”, that people don’t make classics anymore, at least nothing that would survive like the classics from old. That’s because the works of old have been magnified through population growth and human intervention over time. Even as people keep originally inventing stories that would be directly at home in any of the old classics from any civilization you may wish to point to (in terms of your “worth” or “uniqueness” or “excellence” or whatever the hell you want to think of it as), we care less and less about pushing these. House of Leaves is not a “lesser” or “modern” retelling of any story of old, it IS a story of old. It is a descent into a personalized and adaptive abysshell where the only way to come back up is to fly. Sort of like the reverse of Icarus - or maybe, as I think of it, Icarus is so poignant because its own story is a plotwise-inversion of the emotions it tells, or Icarus’ journey in his mind. Even as the story shows a joyful ascent of Icarus to the sun, this is emotional/plotwise pretty much the same as Navidson’s descent into the house; they are simply different flavors of telling the exact same story. Icarus plummeting to the ground to die IS Navidson and Karen escaping the house (although not its effects, yes I know, blah blah blah). House of Leaves is just seen as a spinoff because it came later, as though people can’t have original unique experiences that are nevertheless the same as ones of those who came before them.




 Absolutely gutpunched by The Whalestoe Letters.