Rain World (SPOILERS)




um, um, slugcat percent

When I started playing rainworld, I was scared of the game, and entranced by its atmosphere. The rain seemed to be the biggest hurdle in the world, not the terrain or the creatures within. It was loud, and terribly scary. But I was driven to watch anyway - without ever knowing what the consequences were, I would stay up to die again and again just to see the rain start, and find out when it would prove too much. the karma gates were scary; I didn’t know what I might find in one of them. I didn’t know what karma was; I didn’t know why some rejected me and others didn’t. I had ideas to bring items to them, thinking they needed an offering to let me through. Creatures slowly became the scariest thing; I would hesitate to even be in the same room as one when I didn’t have to. When I scrolled the map it appeared to me hazy, distant, and ethereal, like it was straight from the mouth of a diety - I figured the land stretched indefinitely, and that there was no point memorizing paths either in structures or in real terrain because I felt so small and transient in the world.

I started at the outskirts of course, and from there went to the industrial district, then to the garbage wastes. The outskirts and industrial district were both similar to each other, so the difference in the garbage wastes really struck me. It also nullified somewhat the feeling of transience that has built up in the first two regions; I could distinctly tell I was somewhere I had not been before, but that it was recognizeable, and would always be here. I was not simply drifting through ethereal areas, but passing through real tangible ones that would stay there even after I passed.

At this point, though, I was still playing entirely blind. I didn’t know the scavengers would follow me through my journey. I still didn’t understand how karma worked. I didn’t know passages were ticking. I was exploring the world to press on, because I needed to get somewhere, though took the world in for what it was. Shaded citadel and shoreline shocked me. They were new and unknown and vast and scary (particularly shoreline).

//////

something something I think I wrote this after I had gone to Five Pebbles, but before finishing the game. My main point was that “I no longer feel so scared and lost and I’m not sure if I like it or not :)”

ok, just “finished” the game. By which I mean I got to the bottom of subterranean. what the fuck lmao.

There’s something about games recently like Fatum Betula or Rain World that itch such a strange part inside of me. It’s some sort of hidden game dev inside me that wants to make levels and little games and environments lmfao

Rain World in particular is fucked up in how well it targets me

- Self contained and extensively thought out environments
- Crumbling, overgrown, abandoned aesthetic
- Bold colors
- Smooth and robust movement system
- Intelligent ecosystem
- Platforming
- GRAPPLE???

It’s cuz Rain World has fucking vision, it’s just centered in their environments. Rain World did not set out to break any unknown boundaries or push people into an experience they would never be able to dream of. Rain World is unspeakably humble in how it presents itself. It, somehow, gets across the beauty of nature surviving by itself in isolation, despite you being an active participant. You do not feel like “this is where the story is happening” - you constantly feel as though you are away from the story and the actions and events of “whatever is happening” in the world. Because this is no uninhabited planet - there are things happening. Entire cities are laid upon the top of clouds. There are structures built on the shoreline, waving and lucid. Some electromechanical *thing* whizzes past you at incomprehensible speeds, even by our standards - nothing has happened to us, and we never see what things are continuously passing us by, but we are certain nevertheless that to find out would be a swift, unnatural - or perhaps, in this world, natural - death. No creatures consider themselves crowning - each simply lives where it lives, on it’s own on the side of the story, just like you. They are travelling through your world just as you travel through theirs. We do not see any of these things structures being built, we do not know what they are for - and we never get to. We are a small animal, and we do not need to know what the neon blue zapping batteries are powering, we only need to know with a glance that they are dangerous. We don’t know what’s being powered and what it’s doing - we only know the close up, physical, intimate encounters with the space the batteries take up in the world. So much is clearly happening in the world, but to be blunt, none of it is for us, and neither should it be; we are but an animal, passing through. We do not care about what “concepts” are pushing and pulling in the ether above us, we do not know and do not need to know of what is being constructed in abstract space where we don’t see. We need to find food today, and we need to find shelter after, for the rains are heavy at night. I find a beauty in the fact that we are interacting with the world in a way it was not “meant” to be interacted with. Physical computers are built for the abstract space which they open up above them - so to be a creature, small, only knowing the computer for the metal surfaces and whirring lights, we have an entirely new and organic interaction with their physical shells. We are seeing the world from outside, we are resting on the all too real and all too physical crust of all the ideas and connections and thoughts and processes whirring within - and we see moss on metal, and small winds, and darkness, a lot of the time. We see a collection of other things living out here with us.

//////

Because we don’t know why the environment is “like that” as the animal being played as, we don’t know why the environment is “like that” as a player. We don’t know what anything is “for”, we only know what our experience is; of the physical mechanical innards of whatever conceptual forces are moving above our heads. We feel like a small animal.

//////

Ironically, this feeling falls apart later, as the endgame story and subsequent DLCs and stuff seem to be aimed at feeding people’s desires to be a main character and influence the Bigger Story

I want to see a game, a world, where something akin to the ending of rainworld penumtimate is not penultimate, but is instead just another part of the story

Because the story you live doesn’t end like that - it never has for you, and anybody who has experienced it end like that (the dead) are necessarily not the ones playing your gd game. Nobody knows what death is like! But this is beside the point; godly experiences like that do not mark the end of anyone’s life. You will wake up the next day or you wont. Having the climax be the end is LAME bc I think how the climax is handled after - how the story deals with the fact that life still has to go on after the climax - says more about it than the climax itself.

Rain World crystallized for me the difference between depicting a flash and actually being a flash

Character named “Looks”. I love Looks to the Moon.

A good platformer doesn’t make you rely on accuracy, but on precision and WITS

I really reall like Rain World’s way of handling player death, the karma system. It makes death not too important for most of the game, but staying alive for continuous stretches becomes something that you need to work for, and you only need the stretches if you’re trying to get more out of the game. In other words, by attempting to engage more with thew game, it naturally becomes even more necessary to stay alive, providing a built in scaling system. It doesn’t feel too fast to take away benefits that have been stockpiled, but also doesn’t feel too fast to build them up once lost.

Also wanna touch on how my feelings toward rain world have shifted since I started. When I was first playing (this most recent time, I don’t remember the first first time) I was really scared of the world I was in and didn’t kn-

//////

again this was me trying to make the point “I no longer feel so scared and lost and I’m not sure if I like it or not :)”. It seems to have been hard for me, at this stage, to be able to talk about that

Recap of my thoughts rn:

- How am I supposed to “rate” Rain World? (And in extension, anything). The only things I can rate is my experience with it, which is really just a reflection. There is no objective rainworld experience I can extrapolate to rate; should I rate how likely it is that people will have an experience similar to mine? Rate based on what I think the average will be of every subjective experience?
- Rainworld, as amazing an experience it was, has taught me a lot abt how I DON’T want to make a game. There was a distinct turning point a little ways in (once I beat The Exterior, and transitioned to Five Pebbles and started grinding the game 3 days straight) my experience of the game was so dramatically different than at the start. My wonder eith the world was not sustained; it dropped, and I then saw the game for what it was.
- How is a game supposed yo carry you through an open-choice experience when necessarily there has to be a limit to how expansive the choices get? They must be codified into discrete actions and consequences, and paths cannot sinply continue indefinitely and branch forever. You are bringing someone through the narrow pathway of a channel of actions they can take. Once again; a game with multiple endings is (usually) cheap as fuck! It (usually) speaks to an inability to say everything you want in a single story, and rather than fixing this, you instead make the path a little wider. News flash; you are not eliminating the path, you are only making it wider. And of course this is where the “usually” comes in; it’s possible to use a wider path well, and in a way that makes the wider path purposeful and impactful. Sure. But it’s often used as a bandaid patch for suboptimal, or unclear, or unfocused, story telling.
- Regardless of how much lore you add on, if it’s separate from the gameplay, people will fundamentally lose the wonder after a while, and will *just play the game*. And once they have figured out the game, there will be nothing to keep them there, except for a pursuit of perfection (speedrunning) that is completely separate from your intended experience (questionable if that’s even relevant or not). Not that the point is to keep people there forever; no; your game - your art - will always be just a flash in one’s life besides yours. Make it a good flash, rather than making it depict a good flash

Rain World is the best at: making gradients between areas

Thank you Rain World for the huge part you played in teaching me of the importance and impact of placing the placing within a larger environment, and having that be the focal point. The environmental designers on your team, whatever team led “story via backgrounds seen in order in gradients, revealing only nonverbal communication to tell a larger story of the structures and shit”, went out of their fucking minds. The design of the exterior is just so incredible. I suppose, I should simply play region packs by themselves. (I am talking about modded regions now) The “pointlessness” of just hitting each one in order makes no sense. You should treat EACH modded experience as it’s own region of experience, rather than haphazardly throwing it together yourself. It was a nice experiment in technicall planning though to connect those modded regions lol. That actually took me hours to solve. But anyway. I loved rain world for the story its evironment told and I am SO SAD that I fucked up the return trip and went BACK DOWN the exterior rather than going to the left to chimney canopy. Also that I killed moon. Motherfucker im so upset about that. I don’t think it’s an issue of “gahh new players suck they keep killing moon” and more “wait good point, why the fuck are you able to kill moon anyway?” It doesn’t make sense with the rest of how the story is structured; it is split between slugcats. You are able to go between regions, but each region is the same upon return. Being able to PERMENANTLY alter any of the regions seems to go against the philosphy of the game that we have such a small difference on the world around us (read; none - the entire game is us “getting around” in the unforginving and stable environment around us). And besides, there is nothing to be gained by killing moon. There is no alternate path too explore; ALL it does is close one path without opening another.

Rain World taught me that I am a curator!!!

And that my “modded campaign” route sucks lmao. It is based by vibe by literal geographic environment rather that story, which ones are supposed to go together how they were designed to, etc.

Also, thank you to Rain World for showing me how short a “first experience” with something is.

================================================================

Rain World: Downpour (SPOILERS)



Artificer highlights:

- Dream sequence 1
    - The one where they’re just out in the fields of garbage wastes. I know most of this story is supposed to be about scavs and the children and stuff, but this one struck me just for the difference between artificer garbage wastes and the memory garbage wastes. I was already still in the shock period of seeing garbage wastes as a hostile place of death and danger - there were all sorts of lizards all around (some of them red) that made crossing any open terrain perilous, there was rot infesting the place, scavs (as an enemy, not as the plot piece) were incessant and dangerous, and goddamn vats of acid. It was a hell of a wakeup call to start the campaign and immediately be put to the fucking test; each open field required tremendous effort, and many many many cycles, just to cross.
    - And then, in the middle of all this, I get a dream; it’s a couple small completely defenseless baby slugcats tottering through the garbage wastes. My immediate reaction was essentially one of extreme worry, and… confusion. Not in that I didn’t get what was happening (a small amount, but not significant). Really alarmed and somewhat petulant confusion at seeing these small poor creatures so freely walked about the garbage wastes, that I had just firmly registered in my head as an absolute death zone. It was the same confusion you would get if you saw a crowd of people watching a baby duck be placed into an alligator tank; it’s an assurity to you that the duck will die, it’s just a matter of time, and you are confused and upset that all these people would simply watch this happen. similarly, I watched these small creatures bungle their way across the landscape, and felt hurt and confused that someone would let them be there - that they didn’t even know what was to come.
    - Yet the memory continued, and I registered more of the surroundings, as my fight or flight instincts wore off a bit to let me look at the rest of the scene. There were batflies fluttering in the sky; I had never seen batflies in GW yet as artificer. It was an absurdly simple sight. The sky was not polluted and streaked with chemicals; it was just dull, cloudy, like it had just gently drizzled. There were no lizards around. It did actually feel like a childhood memory; a scene remarkable only in how unremarkable it was - nothing happening, nothing about to happen; simply being in a place and being left to your own devices.
    - My confusion turned sad. At this point I understood no terrible threat was about to pop out, and what I was looking at was all there was; a simple plain scene of baby slugcats taking a play break as they crossed an empty field. It felt unfair that they would be able to exist here, only to have it taken away soon, something I knew would happen based on the little bit of GW I had already experienced as artificer. A sadness when you see someone excitedly and contentedly setting off on a journey that you know in your heart will end poorly.
- Dream sequence 4 (?)
    - The one where artificer’s last child is blown up and falls into a pool of leeches. This one got me more than the first child death scene because it was the last child. Before, I at least had penance that artificer was able to escape with one of her children. But losing the second one, quite simply, was fucked up. I felt, only for a flash, an intense grief for having lost both of them, especially when I had come so close to saving just one. It went away quickly, and was muddled, for I do not have any real experience with that sort of emotion/circumstance, but some dull peek came through anyway.
- LTTM’s structure
    - dark, creaking, in crisis - a structure that big all for one being, all dark and silent and failing at once. Furthermore, a feeling that someone was trapped inside, scared or unconscious or dying or dead, and I could only stand on the very outside
- Post credits (scary campaign icon, and waking up as chieftain)



My favorite region from original rain world was the exterior, and my favorite region from downpour (so far) is LTTM. It’s just… so fucking sick. Both of those, the first time you traverse them, have very similar feelings, and the feelings are awe and trepidation and the knowledge that you are nearing an epicenter, and it is not one that cares or knows about you. The journey from the bottom of the tower all the way up the legs, crossing underneath, is so so so fucking sick. It does feel like a long, arduous trek to some center of a howling storm - the iterators themselves (i haven’t even got to moon yet, but I presume) are such a perfect eye in the storm that is climbing their structures. To be one small slugcat, coming from the still and relatively silent lands beyond their towers - crossing over small mossy metal under clouded skies - to now be passing through this place of electricgreen flecks, things whizzing past, flashes, whirs, creaks, wind and sparks; it feels so incredible. And this experience is not “sudden” either - you have made a long journey to this place, and you have seen where the landscape changes between different places over and over again. Climbing the structure from the bottom to the top is SUCH a good gradient from outside the storm → into the thick of the storm → eye of the storm

Which calls into focus a related thing I love about these structures; the concept of having this huge massive structure, all to house one small being inside of it, is really fucking awesome. It forces you to acknowledge, in a way, the expanse of your own body as a large thing you pilot but do not know every intricacy at every moment, because you are in real time passing through someone else’s body - a large, constructed, mechanical body. One that almost makes the being inside seem helpless, and this specifically because of it’s constructed nature; it almost seems as though they are being overpowered by something they don’t control. Tying directly back to the game; the whizzes of incomprehensible things blitzing past and lights, all of which the iterator knows about but cannot see, make it feel like a far larger system is at work than the iterator themselves, and that they are subject to being at the center of such a massive structure, and are forced to use it and keep track of it even though they are not in control of it, and most of it is really just them relying on the structure to maintain itself, relying on the processes within to continue uninterrupted. Which is especially apparent when you are a small creature on the outside of their structure, and you very much see them NOT present, but instead see a bunch of things and lights and other creatures that ARE there, that you realize that the iterator really is trapped inside this panconscious maelstrom of activity and entropy with all these stories happening on the surface and throughout, so numerous that the iterator cannot know all of them, much less control them.

it feels like they are helpless, and can only trust that their structure will remain okay, all while performing tasks they are told to do and feel they should. Isolated from anything on the outside. It’s, somehow, an incredibly human situation.

Which is why I think Moon’s destruction is such an incredible storyline to follow, because it allows you to accept the subsequent falling apart of the structure that, despite the sturdiness and robustness that it seems meant to portray, nevertheless seems through every inch a fragile network, too complex for its own good, that will fail at some point because such a heightened state of activity across such a large area surely cannot be maintained for so long.

And they get fucking rained on too.



Also Moon is kinda the attention span goat. Having such a huge structure letting you process so much fuckass information at once all the fucking time to then being just one small being sitting on the ground in silence, and being OKAY with that? not going into fucking information withdrawal? GOAT.



On the importance of seeing “the original thing” first, or “knowing where things came from” - so you know the exact weight that the first instance was used in. For example, in rain world LTTM. I have encountered many, many, many gates in rainworld and have passed through (most) of them. I fundamentally understand gates as the loading zone between two regions, and lore wise (?) as some sort of locking mechanism to prevent unauthorized travel between different places. I know what a gate it, how it works, I’ve seen many different styles and such. But today, for the first time when explorring LTTM, I encounter a faulty (?) gate. one with no locks; it is just completely open, and I pass through from one side to another without actually changing regions. And it’s fucking cool! I’ve never actually seen a gate be empty/open like that, and it speaks SO MUCH to the state of that side of LTTM, the story behind that bit of her structure, etc. The pathway in and out connect up and make sense (small animals have started crawling inside), it’s just really fucking cool.

Now imagine if I had played Rain World with mods, and I saw one of them do it. Sure, I would still think it was cool, but there’d also be an air of it not being real, or being just a neat idea by a mod developer that wouldn’t actually happen in-world. Somehow, some of the excitement and wonder of seeing a broken gate would have been removed if I saw someone else using it, because quite simply they would (probably) be using it primarily because THEY saw the broken LTTM gate, and wanted to do the same thing. There is a weight that comes with seeing something in the context of when it was first conceived. The broken gate is LTTM is cool as fuck because it was MEANT to be there, and that’s the first time they put a broken gate it, so it fits SO WELL with where it is. Anybody else using that idea would simply be doing that; using the idea. There’d be an implicit disconnect in that they just used the same puzzle piece someone else created before them. That matters! You can feel the difference!



I’m very clearly thinking too much about iterator superstructures and their parallel to just “people in real life”, but nevertheless I AM thinking about it. I love the emotion from seeing each structure as such an absoluttely massive and electric behemoth with incomprehensibly fast things buzzing back and forth, and the huge bulk of processing used up, and the fact that it’s all just for one single entity. And, furthermore, the dual fact that each iterator is so completely cut off and alone from every other iterator because of the structure that surrounds them, and the fact that nevertheless each iterator has their own enormous unique casing, and the secret hidden third fact that this casing is, just in the raw actual makeup and surface terrain, different and unique to each iterator. And THEN combined with the fact that regardless of how huge these structures are and how monolithic they seem when in their presence, and how many different “types of areas” they contain just across their own surface, they nevertheless are completely absent when you are not near their cans. i.e. when you are in outskirts, there is no looming structure or green electric lights or whizzing machines; you’re just in the outskirts, and any knowledge of iterators or their cans is just a thought. (And, of course, nevertheless the impact of the iterators on the environment via the rain! Absent but still felt! And then, even further, the idea that (presumably?) once you go far enough out you don’t even get the effect of the rain). So fucking cool. I suppose I don’t know if the design of the iterators is so nuanced and if the feel of being a small creature crossing slow gradients of environment across their surface  is so poignant as to call all these different emotions and realizations from across so many disciplines together or if I am just doing that myself and I am using the iterator’s design as the central object of my geeking, but I know I am geeking anyway. Shit is so fucking cool. I love environmental storytelling and I LOVE it on as large a scale as Rain World does.



Just finished Spearmaster ending (or mostly finished it, the game froze on the ending and skipped it so I had to watch a video of it lol). I strangely feel so much compassion for LTTM, on a very personal and somewhat self indulgent level. There is something so evocative about one single being trapped inside an artificially constructed monolithic cube of metal and wires and neurons that they are fully dependent on yet have very little power to control, and that very box is what cuts them out from so much of life and connection with i.e. other iterators.

Comparing Moon’s frantic active structure to the sight of it defunct and creaking and dark as Artificer - and furthermore, the fact that Artificer could not enter - is something I find really evocative. To be on the outside of some huge structure and know that far far away in the center is one single being who has to deal with this collapse all by themselves - and by ‘deal with it’, it really translates to ‘make peace with death all by themselves’ - is terribly sad. Especially since Artificer’s goal is fundamentally not related to LTTM at all - you don’t even stand there as a thwarted helper who was stopped despite their best efforts, you stand there as a passerby who never intended to go in, and so only glimpses the raw form of Moon’s structure’s collapse. It makes me feel awful, it really really does. If I am to be honest and spell out the analogy, it’s because it evokes very similar feelings to what I am experiencing now in my life, which is why I claimed the feeling was self indulgent. Being trapped inside something you know is constructed, artificial, and not having any way to get out or any way to control it is very similar to simply what it is like to feel trapped by the world, complete with isolating and the sinking despair that you have no control over whether it goes down or not. I could try and crsytallize more connections here but the exact ties aren’t the point; it is the feeling Moon has that causes her to send out a goodbye message, rather than a call for help, as her last message that strikes me the most. It is being in a dire situation, and fundamentally alone, and being forced to accept a collapse and an end by yourself.

I feel compelled to say, to some idea of her as a real entity rather than a collection of prewritten dialogue; I am sorry Moon, I have felt some of what you feel. And I hope your next chapter of life, on the ground near water, is much more peaceful than your life in the superstructure ever was, despite being just as lonely. I almost wish my own structure would collapse soon, although I wish I would land beside someone else.

The ending of rain world should have been abt the iterators breaking free or learning they do not need the metal boxes to experience the sight of a flower, and that they should be striving for your (the slugcat’s) existence, not the other way around. is the point not to show that the big metal boxes, neurons and all, are ultimately meaningless and do nothing to help one “ascend”? is the purpose of these huge boxes not to imply that they have unlimited processing power and connection capabilities, and the fact that they still can’t “figure out the answer” to be indicative of the neuron’s and processing power’s and connection’s irrelevance to living a life? To be indicative that there is no answer? Obviously this was part of the intent, but the payoff feels way too subtle to be of any significant impact



#1 Downpour Complaint: sellouts. You’ve gone for cool wacky OC character creations and iterator-focused campaigns over the rain world “exploring an environment” feel. Each new slugcat I play, it follows the same patterns of “let’s go see how our favorite two iterators are doing!”. Go to Five Pebbles, go to Looks to the Moon (in some order), and figure out where they want you to go and what they want you to carry there. This is not exact, of course, notably for gourmand or artificer - but even both of them must visit an iterator to continue on their journey. It seems somewhat rote to always approach one of them. Even now, I have just started the saint campaign. I of course have no idea what my goal is, and I may stand corrected over time, but my instincts tell me to first go to Five Pebbles, and then to LTTM. And the campaigns do not allow for much unique exploration, or unique events, inside many oif the existing regions. They simply sit as they were. Sky Islands is still fundamentally “just” Sky Islands - for most of the slugcats, there is no “reason” to pass through any of the regions besides to get to or from one of the iterators. And likewise, the new regioins fundamentally seem to be places not meant to be naturally explored, but to be approached with a purpose; Gourmand must reach journey’s end, artificer must fight the chieftain, spearmaster must find LTTM, rivulet must find the Heart. In base Rain World, there was an impetus to explore each regions simply BECAUSE of the lack of a direct goal. In absence of any clear pointers anywhere, you had no choice but to explore freely and fully - and indeed, the “least exciting” part of the adventure was after I reached Five Pebbles, and was given my first direct task. Placing any sort of absolute goal in any of these regions, especially the new ones, immediately shrinks the region into just a vessel for that goal.



On guides, spoilers, and expectations in games. I will speak mote on this later, but I at least want to get the base idea down now. My most fun (read: engaging) experiences with Rain World have been the first half of my survivor run, and my (as of now barely started) Saint run. Both of these are the only times in Rain World when I went in/am going in truly blind, not knowing what I have to do or where to go. Pure unadulterated exploration for the sake of exploration. Survivor because of obvious reasons, it being my first playthrough; and Saint in a surprising change in that I am feeling new and unfamiliar even in the same environments/regions because the feel of them is so much different.

The second half of Survivor, and Hunter, and all four other Downpour slugcats - while fun - were significantly less “wondrous”, for a few nebulous reasons. For one, I pretty incessantly minorly spoiled myself so I knew some of the plot points of each going in. But, more importantly, I looked at maps for them and guides for “what the intended route” was, which I know came from taking a bad path in the second half of survivor and being ipset that I missed out on so many regions because I backtracked instead of going somewhere new. And, funny enough, that coincides with the first time I got directions as survivor; I can pretty accurately say that the divide in my survivor playyhrough was pre-directions from FP and post-directions.

Ok tldr for now; following guides (even if they are “spoiler free” guides) is lame and takes away so much experience. And, in extent, many ways of “giving a goal to complete to the player” are as well.



The Saint campaign is so fucking fun actually. Having the snow adds SO MUCH FLAVOR to the world, it really does. It makes the same terrain you are crossing feel new. Even though you are accustomed to the places and where they connect, it feels so different to move through them - especially since Saint can’t fight, so interactions with the other creatures all feel new and unique and feel like they have weight - so you get to keep the best parts of your familiarity (terrain traversal) while nevertheless STILL having the joy of new experiences because it all nevertheless FEELS different. Really really incredible little package.



I kinda of (?) like the Saint ending way better than the normal survivor ending. Being forced to keep cycling rather than somehow magically reaching eternity is such a better, and more human, message. Idk yet about the whole Echo imagery - it makes sense with lore, but becomes too abstract to really feel intimately as a human



Thinking more about Saint, and how they seem to essentially fill a Bodhisattva role in Rain World. At first I really liked it because it refused some sort of magical ascension for saint and instead kept them in the cycle, living a back in the same world. A little mystical in spirit, given Rubicon and the magic powers and still seeing those magic dragons and such, but the fundamental reality was that Saint did not/could not find any sort of break from the cycle, just like real life, which I appreciated. However, this is flavored (as stated above) through a Bodhisattva angle, where Saint is reliving the same cycle again and again and again and again BECAUSE they are fundamentally tied to the urge to ascend others - which doesn’t actually reject ascension after all. If anything, it wholeheartedly embraces the idea that one can simply “ascend” and suddenly leave behind the cycle of life and death, and that Saint is essentially the ONLY one to not be able to because of their drive to make sure everyone else ascends before them, which is an infinitely long task. On the surface I would accept this angle, if “ascending” simply meant how humans experience enlightenment, but it doesn’t seem this way. After all the dialogue is said and all the story beats finish, Rain World continues to have a surprisingly strong emphasis that the cycle can simply be left entirely - removing creatures from the world as we know it. This is, of course, only my understanding, and I very well could be missing information on how Rain World presents itself, but this is how I understand what Rain World says. And I have a problem with this, simply in the fact that it fundamentally becomes a non-human ending to what is, at it’s core, an EXTREMELY human story (i.e. the simple base elements of living life day after day after day after day).



Thinking recently more about what I said before - about most mods fundamentally just using whatever was in the base game rather than creating themselves. I don’t mean that mods for games in general are cheap or fake or anything, but I noticed often when playing moderately modded games, and ESPECIALLY when playing heavily modded games, that I just “wouldn’t really care” about what was happening. Regardless of what headspace I was in going into it, I ended up bring a “let me slap my dick around on each problem I face until I luck my way through it, who cares if I die 10 times trying the same thing” rather than the more calculated approach that I usually take towards vanilla games. I think this is related to the concept of mods simply using the base game rather than continuing to build off of it, like I said before.

For example, in the context of Rain World; I already gave a speech before about the broken gate in Looks to the Moon’s superstructure. I now am playing the Watcher campaign, and I see what the little meter for their invisibility looks look, a cloudy white shifty bar that slowly depletes. Now unfortunately, this bar isn’t new for me - one of the mods I downloaded used this same bar asset to represent something different. When I downloaded that mod I hadn’t played the watcher yet (and I remained pretty spoiler free) so I thought the bar was a completely custom thing that the mod creator made. And instead of going “oh wow that’s cool” and appreciating it for what it was, I ended up thinking it was strange because it just didn’t seem to “fit” for what the mod was doing (a timestop thing) (that i didn’t use for anyone wondering bc i only downloaded it so I could stay at vista points for as long as I wanted, but the time stop distorts visuals which defeated the whole purpose D:). Not that the bar necessarily felt out of place, but quite simply I didn’t feel that “fundamental click” that instinctually tied the two things - the functionality of the mod and the appearance of the bar - together. When creative ideas like that form that involve more than one “thing”, if they are good natural ideas, there will be some intangible quality that ties them together as a package that together communicates something extra that the individual aprts don’t have on their own. Take, for example, the actual genesis of that cloudy bar; used for the Watcher’s invisibility. Purely off vibe, the appearance of the bar DOES seem to intrinsically tie to the functionality way more than the time stop did, which makes it feel purposeful. I only regret having been spoiled on it before seeing it’s original use.

Which is what made me think about this whole thing again in the first place, in the context of playing mods when you haven’t even seen the whole thing. I am in a unique circumstance, given the nature of Rain World and the fact that it has two disconnected DLCs and I only started playing directly after the second one was released, that when I inevitably started downloaded mods they all invariably contained elements from both DLCs that I did not have any idea about yet, having only just started the base game. As such, there were a bunch of ideas that I saw - the smokey bar for the time stop, broken gates, mechanics for new slugcats, etc - that were simply taken from the other DLCs and repurposed for each mod, unbeknownst to me. They were certainly cool, but nevertheless kind of just blended into one soup. Part of that was in the fact that they overlapped with each other since I enabled a lot at once, which gets into the plight of kitchen sink modpackjs in general, which in itself is just of just a more acute and obvious version of what I am about to talk about. But even if I didn’t have a lot, there is an underlying thing that would prevent me from seeing the mods as natural; they were all taking stolen ideas.

Let me give some examples. one other major mod that I encountered this with was the Pearlcat mod. Which is, let’s be honest, a really fucking cool mod - I dropped it when I made the decision to play all DLCs before touching heavy mods again, and still plan to go back to it because it WAS really cool. However, it has a lot of abilities that I had no CLUE where they came from, I just knew that pearlcat had them. Pearlcat could do a sort of sparky electric doublejump that seems more like they were being thrown rather than jumping. They had the ability to “lock pipes” so creatures couldn’t get through. They had a pearl that would illuminate the surroundings in a digital yellow outline. I had no clue, when seeing these, that EACH of them was just an idea that was already in the original game somewhere. Artificer has essentially the exact same double jump, albeit a more “explosive” version - and the electricity seemed similar to those circlepatterned cyan lizards who jump around. Guardians will lock pipes in Rubicon in Saint’s campaign. Overseers will light up Shaded Citadel for Monk when they pass through. Neither of those three things I had seen in the base game yet, I only knew that I was suddenly seeing them for the first time then.

Now, what I am about to say is not to cheapen the Pearlcat mod (or any other mod), but merely to illustrate my point about things being taken out of their original context. There was a sort of “sandbox” feel about Pearlcat, a sort of “yeah fuck it lets do that too” mentality that didn’t necessarily make Pearlcat feel bad or anything - the character is very well thought out - but didn’t feel “at home” in the character. And this extended to many other mods I played with too - I saw a bunch of ideas that were new to me, but nevertheless didn’t feel ‘at home” in their context of the mods. The result was that I was playing a game that felt like a lot of slightly misplaced, or taken-out-of-context ideas even though I had no clue that they were ACTUALLY taken out of context, which culminated in the “I care way less about treating this seriously” attitude that I began to associate with my modded playthrough.

I noticed a similar thing with Noita, although I will touch on this very briefly and in no specifics. In essence, the “same thing” happened playing Noita - I played a modicum of the base game, downloaded a bunch of mods that unbeknownst to me just repurposed ideas or functionality from the base game, and then instinctually felt that the game I was playing was not not authentic. Not in a “not vanilla” sense, because I believe a well curated mod, or modpack, can feel authentic in what it does. I mean it didn’t feel authentic in that I could TELL, even though I had no conception for what I was “telling” or why at the time, that the context in which I was seeing the new things presented to me was not the context in which they were created.

Bringing this back to the general topic, independent of either Rain World or Noita. There is a certain intangible quality that ties ideas to the context in which they were generated. It can’t really be expressed in words, but it’s truth can be seen in the simple fact that that is WHY those ideas were generated in that context in the first place. The ideas did not exist separately and happen to come into being in that context, it was the fact that that context existed that allowed them to be formed at all. The pipe blocking mechanic arose from a specific and relevant story-focused reason in the Saint campaign, that feels INCREDIBLY at home in that part of the campaign. Same with the yellowdigital outlines, same with the broken gate. They were created in a home and presented to the audience within that very home, which is why they hit you one a first playthrough. But there is a certain inauthenticity when they are presented in a place that is not their home.

Not to say that idea cannot be effectively and authetically presented in places that are not their home - or rather, I firmly believe that ideas can be presented in foreign contexts for the sake of supporting a different, larger idea that uses the foreign-context of the first idea AS it’s own authentic home. I hope this still makes sense. This is something that [name] does very well. But this is besides the point.

Suffice to say, this entry is simply to point out to myself the reality of how ideas used outside of their original context will implicitly and silently whisper to everybody that this is not their home, and so people will be able to tell on some subconscious level.


================================================================

Rain World: The Watcher (SPOILERS)



Yeah they did this one well. Hello watcher. Reeaaallllyyyyy fucking liking it actually. The regions are a little inspired not even gonna lie. And the texture of them is so obviously closer to the base game than to downpour; they are emotional environment pieces first and foremost. I’m like 6 hours in, have absolutely no lore but a lot of questions, and am loving it. I trust them to answer the ones that need to be answered, not the ones I want answered. “But how is it happening” is the least productive question in a creative environment. Let it happen.

I have so far been to Coral Caves, Aether Ridge, and I just got to Torrential Railways. I technically know of a fourth region, Sunlit Port, but that’s because I accidentally got almost all the way through that portal when i didn’t mean to and I think it passed some threshhold of marking it on the little global 3D map thing but not the threshhold to actually take me there lol. Maybe it’s supposed to do that. Anyway.

The three regions (Let’s be real 2.2, I JUST got to Torrential Railways) have been a fucking treat. They are lonely, they are unashamedly unique, and they do not strive to answer my questions about where they are, why they are there, etc. For all I know these are portals to grounds around other iterators. Or these are snippets of the past, or future. Maybe these are from a timeline where iterators didn’t exist. Who fucking knows? I don’t. All I know is that I am in them, I am small, and I am not sure where to go but I know to keep moving anyway. The exact same urges as those inspired in me by the base Rain World game. This really does bring back “first playthrough” feelings, and I am really trying to savor it.

I like the emphasis on stealth that this has. I will be fully transparent, i am admittedly not really using the Stealth bar they gave me. Perhaps I will be driven to use it more in the future, perhaps I won’t. It has proven truly useful one single time. The good news is that it’s so out of the way that it’s not like it’s being shoved in my face, so even if my playthrough does end with it being useless it at least won’t end with it being a nuisance. Regardless, the fact that they included the meter in the first place speaks to the whole philosophy behind this DLC; I am not in control of the world, and I often must hide.

Rain World had a built in learning curve where despite the game being the exact same control-wise throughout your playthrough, it got easier simply by you becoming more familiar with the controls and how to pull off maneuvers, to either it’s benefit or detriment. Familiarity with controls in this sense allows you to exert some power over the environment simply via being able to traverse better, but never enough to make you feel like you had ever “gotten out of your place” as a small creature that can easily die with no consequence on the world. The Watcher plays off this feeling well, as it allows you to have full control over your slugcat (indeed, it expects you to, as it treats you as though you have played the base game and downpour first) and still NOT feel like you are above the land.

This is something that I was admittedly a little upset about in Downpour. I have gone over this at length in my own head, but here we go. In the original Rain World game, there was a distinct feeling of looking up and seeing these immobile giants (both literally and figuratively) who governed the greater processes of the land, but simultaneously the feeling that regardless of the giants, you were still just a small creature at their feet, and had to survive. Or you were a small creature in the industrial buildings around them and had to survive. The flavor of survival was dictated by the location you were in, even as the collection of locations together revealed a larger story.

In Downpour, they went very heavy on the lore and characters and your own power in the world. In context of the previous analogy, Downpour picked you up and allowed you to float amongst the giants, meet them face to face, and have influence over them. Notably, you were still a small creature, and so your floating was still dictated and flavored by where you were in the environment. However… you were metaphorically floating. It told you that you had sway over how the world worked now, that you were a player in it. I found this to be in many ways the antithesis of what the original Rain World tried to do; I no longer felt small, scared, and beset by a vague feeling of confusion and fear that I nevertheless did not have a real reason to focus on because my concerns were always more immediate than the larger thing causing the confusion. In Downpour I was no longer forced to slink around, scared by what I saw, timid in some places and daring in others. Instead, I was told explicitly that I could now fight and that I was expected to subjugate the land the same way the giants had subjugated me (exaggeration). I had magic powers, I had incredible movement, I had resources. Key parts of some sort of mission were now entrusted to me, the small animal. I was told, suddenly, that i DID matter, and that the land DID care whether or not I died.

//////

I was sad in a way, now looking back and parsing my emotions, to have been told that.

//////

So much of the allure of the original Rain World was in that it was abundantly clear that the world did not give a shit whether I lived or died. My life cycle within the world mattered to me and me alone, which made the journey much more intimate and real. But in Downpour, me dying suddenly meant an iterator, an entire megastructure supercomputer, either remained defunct or lived. That the wider iterator populace was informed or was not; that one’s fateful actions changed or did not. That damage occurred to the terrain or didn’t. That other slugcats lived in peace or didn’t. That the world was brought to ascension or was not. It’s not that this story isn’t “cool”, but it falls in line with in essence what the advertisement would have wanted. More characters, more personality, more plot, more lore. The mysticism of Rain World was infused with *drama*. While this drama was certainly engaging, it also trivialized the world a little bit - or at least, felt at odds with the base game. I won’t say I wasn’t necessarily interested - I read pearl dialogue on the wiki and tried to piece together timelines, etc. But nevertheless there was an incredibly different texture of my interest towards Downpour (similar texture to being interested in messy drama, or tiktoks) than of my interest towards Rain World (the texture of curiosity seeing a new plant, or wondering where that weird sound is coming from).

//////

(There is a note about how I love that in Rain World the iterators were introduced, but your interactions with them were limited to dismissive pointing towards somewhere else and being told to gtfo, or as some unimportant but perhaps appreciated visitor. Even as I for rare occasions met them face to face, I was nevertheless overtly treated like the small trivial animal that I appeared to them as).

//////

The Watcher does not feel like Downpour at all. I am suddenly brought back to a place where my death doesn’t matter. Even more so, I would argue, than Rain World; the land in The Watcher is foreign. In Rain World, there was a feeling to an extent (in some places far more than others) that I didn’t belong, but nevertheless it felt like “this was my world”. This is “confirmed” in Downpour, when it’s revealed that slug cats canonically lived nearby. There is a sense that this land is your home, or can be, and you are fundamentally here.

The Watcher, through use of its portals, rejects this idea entirely. I am not just meaningless, but I am also an outsider. Not only does the land not care about me, but via this complete separation and lack of any history between it and I, I don’t care what happens to the land. I am on strange traincars in the rain. I don’t know how I got here, I don’t know where this place is, I don’t even know what time period this place is in. It may be the same time period and I would have no idea, because nothing about this is familiar to me. All I know is that I am suddenly on train cars, in the pouring rain, and I must survive. I am in Aether Ridge; I don’t know this wind. I don’t know these large moths. I am not sure what this white liquid is here for, I just know that it’s dangerous. Unlike the void fluid, I have no clue what it’s used for or where it’s pulled from or where it’s going.

//////

I don’t know where these train cars are, I don’t know why this place seems so alabaster-blasted and holydark.

//////

Again; all I know is that I must find food and shelter. In Garbage Wastes, if I died, there was at least comfort in knowing that I died at home in a place that I knew. Even the first time in Garbage Wastes, I knew it was part of “my” land, regardless of if it was the first time I was seeing it or not. I was not sure what the Garbage Wastes were, but I knew they were near my home, and I knew that I cared what happened to them by proxy of my own life. But Aether Ridge is fundamentally not part of “my” land - I not only don’t know the local scene here, I don’t know the larger scene. There is nobody here that knows me, nothing that is familiar. As much as Garbage Wastes doesn’t care if I die, Aether Ridge wouldn’t even NOTICE if I died. The only one who would notice is myself.

in essence, The Watcher has used the portals to strip away any land familiarity that I had, and bring me an entirely new feeling of loneliness tinged by a distinct feeling that I am the foreigner, that I am the one that doesn’t belong; not in a ‘faceless crowd’ sort of way, but in a ‘this land is foreign and nobody will see me die’ way. This world has no traces of my existence prior to me showing up, and will have none after I leave. imo it was a brilliant place to go with the dlc.

The Watcher really makes you feel like a watcher rather than an inhabitant :o



I also love The Watcher’s level design, it’s incredibly unique. I am not sure if it is also made by James Primate or not, but the level design REALLY DISTINCTLY adds to the “you are a foreigner” feel. (Also just learned that James Primate the musician was the one that designed room layouts for the base game. huh. NO WONDER it felt so fluid).

In Rain World, the rooms mostly seemed fundamentally designed for a slugcat. In lore, this is because slugcats were purposed organisms for this area, so of course it would have to be traversable for them. In practicality, the character is playing as a slugcat, and the rooms have to be traversable for the player, etc etc.

In The Watcher, in these new regions, it is clear even in the room level design that they were not intended for slugcats, and were not intended for comprehensive exploration. There are passageways that go nowhere. There are awkward jumps - many of them. There is not so much shelter and nice small places to crawl between. Many times, you will enter a room with no discernible purpose and no other exits other than the one you came through; not meant to be lingered in, but simply existing as a room, the way places do in real life. And most notably, there’s a lot of inaccessible or useless space.

In Rain World, most of the space on screen can be accessed through some means or another - either by walking there, or else somehow they are “in the same air” as everything else - you COULD make your slugcat touch the area if you wanted them to. And more often than not, if you can get to a place, it is self contained or has an obvious end. But the empty space in The Watcher rejects this - the empty spaces are not just background but are full of unique tangible layouts and walls that if you were there you could touch, but you just… aren’t there. And can’t get there. Entire complex sections of rooms are perfectly visible, but you simply have absolutely no way of getting to them, as they are completely cordoned off by walls with no pipes or small crawlways going in or out. In Aether Ridge you see a strung-out set of poles and blocks that extend sideways, and you could go out to them, but there is no reason to because the room does not continue. In many places, the path continues but you cannot, because of your limitations as a slugcat. The Watcher is not afraid of using up screen space with level geometry that you cannot touch.

It is this that really heightens the feeling that you are not supposed to be there. The environment is not readily accessible like Rain World; it unapologetically does NOT let you slink into every crevice and room. Some areas are simply not attainable. The border between what you can and cannot touch is blurred to the extent that you never feel truly at home in whatever terrain you are on; it always feels like you are incidentally finding your way through the structures you are on, rather than following well-set paths made to accommodate you. Sudden acutely awkward jumps in the middle of needlessly complex yet absurdly easily-traversable terrain give you a sense that NEITHER is “meant” for you, you are simply ABLE to be there. Aether Ridge has an immense amount of knobs, gears, platforms, and boxes you may or may not be able to reach. “Intended paths” are messy or obtuse; you may clearly have to get to the top of some machinery, but there are no nicely placed pole paths to shimmy up. You may have to dance around awkwardly on some far-away floating girders, hop up a few short horizontal poles, and then reach a stretch of nothing. You can make it up with an embedded spear - and you do - but were you really supposed to? You don’t know. You’re just trying to climb. But you are reminded, in every jump, that you are a foreigner. You were not made for this land, and it was not made for you.



There’s something incredibly affirming about the following three facts

1. Rain World was made by just two people
2. Rain World was those people’s first game
3. The levels were designed by the musician



I knew the Watcher was gonna be heat from when I saw the new title screen let’s be honest.



I do also really appreciate how short some of the regions are. I just explored Torrential Railways - thoroughly. It’s short, sweet, and doesn’t overstay it’s welcome at all. It explains one specific environmental area very well, and doesn’t feel the need to do any more. And again, keeping with what I’ve been saying and what The Watcher itself has been saying; it is not a home for the slugcat. It incidentally has food and a modicum of predators, but more than anything it is an empty and overtly lonely section of rails. Rained on more and more and more.



I really like the 3D map in The Watcher. I think it solves a lot of the navigation problems that the original game had. Namely, although the geography of each region was mapped well enough, you had no goddamn clue which region connected to where. Standing in Outskirts, you could not plot a path to Shoreline without having done it many times before, or looking at an online map, because there was NOTHING indicating which regions connected the two, and where. Even when you could see where gates were on the map, you had no way of knowing which region they connected to, unless you physically went to them, and even then you had to know each other region well enough to know where the gradient in terrain texture meant you were going. The Watcher fixes this with the 3D map, and how it shows portals on the in-game 2D map. In game, there is a picture showing exactly which region it goes to. In the 3D map, there are lines connecting each region to show you which portals link which ones. Just that - a single line, letting you know you CAN get from one to the other. It doesn’t tell you how or where until you actually get to that region.

I think it’s a realllyyy nice middle ground. Not having any form of long-term trip planning in Rain World was frustrating, but looking at online maps just reveals SO MUCH information that you were likely to spoil yourself (if you didn’t already know the regions and everything), or overfit your journey to the minimap rather than the actual terrain in game, thereby committing Minimap Sin. The Watcher map gives you the pertinent information to alleviate the frustration, without giving so much that it trivializes or deducts from the exploration or terrain traversal.



I have begun to use the whole stealth mechanic thing way more. and yeah it does have a really good place I think. It’s not even necessarily that the watcher specifically needs it over other slugcats, even though it is a very nice stylistic flavortouch. It’s more just another thing that fixes an “issue” I had sometimes with core Rain World; it felt fucking impossible to get by some enemies sometimes. Enemies in water are hard to deal with; sometimes there’s just a real infestation; sometimes you randomly run into a Red and you’re not in the mood for a challenge bc you’re trying to GET somewhere. Sometimes, for some reason or another, you just wanna not fucking be noticed and targetted for one goddamn second. THIS is where the stealth mechanic ties that up really well I think. I had thought it was meant to be used moderately for most of the game; no. It is meant to be used in spikes every once in a while, and it is REALLY useful for those spikes.



I have been shitting a lot on Downpour for not staying true to Rain World’s original vision. I do wanna give it some merit for what it DOES do well though; give me a reason to keep traversing the same rooms. It IS fun, in it’s own way, to have a mission and to use the environment as a journey rather than an ambling destination in and of itself.



And all the regions continue to be vaguely “shipyard themed?” I just got to rusted wrecks (5th discovered, 4th explored) which seems to be a ship of some kind, at least I’m guessing, that’s what my connotation with “rusty wrecks” of any sort is. That plus coral caves, sunlit port. This is a very aquatic shipthemed DLC it seems like. I am super for it. Sunlit port I haven’t been to but… it’s a port. For boats. I like this direction lol



I will say this though; hello?? Can we get a multi act structure? I started off in regular Rain World, which let me know it existed and that the landscape was being changed. I got whisked through a portal by a god and now I’m in this weird dimensional shit. ok cool dope. Do I ever…. go back to Rain World? Am I just in the Dimensions now? Is there any grounding or am I tottering around lost indefinitely? Not that I’m having a bad time, but I think it’s a little disappointing (unless something is cooking that I just have no clue about) to enter this side world, and then either a) just never go back (especially since my progress when I WAS in base game Rain World regions seemed still so open) or b) only go back at the very end (presumably)?

Please let me dip back into reality just for a bit. I beg you. Just to ground this shit. It’s actually important to do so I think pls. I thought the fact that Rain World was getting all weird and twisted and corrupted was cool as fuck, and that it seemed to get stronger with each echo I found, and then the whole getting teleported back to the starting area thing - cool! Dope! It was a really strong start, and given that it was evidently spurred on by the echos, I was implicitly told to go visit echoes. Okay. I started with close nearby ones and slowly spread out. 3 echoes in, something hits a critical mass and I am swept away to a different dimension. SICK!!!! But as cool as these new regions are and as much as I’m loving exploring them, I do nevertheless still care about the base game regions especially since I was JUST tantalized with a brief story arc that ~~strange things are happening to it~~ and I am naturally curious to explore more. But whisking me away and NOT letting me return seems strange. I now wonder if I “messed up” by not vising Five Pebbles or Looks To The Moon in time, that I “lost my chance” to.

Original Rain World has a sense of discovery that was not just tied to seeing new lands, but was tied to uncovering some sort of dim meaning about them. Notably not a meaning that the player had any agency over, but nevertheless a sense of a rich storied history. There was an emotional journey as you moved through region to region. Shaded Citadel → The Exterior → Five Pebbles was such a masterclass in taking the player on an emotional journey over the course of large stretches of lands, and this relied heavily on the fact that they were connected and you could FEEL the rise, the buildup. Even starting all the way from Outskirts - having that intensely quiet literal ‘outskirts’ of a place as the starting point, and later being in the whizzing electric underhang of the exterior: fucking INCREDIBLE! Really brilliant pacing and story structure, all though an unmoving environment. Changing not over time, but over distance.

Downpour went the temporal route of showing lands changing over time, which makes sense considering their goals, and they did a good job with it. But The Watcher throws this out the window with the whole portals thing. There is now no spatial connectedness OR temporal connectedness. I am, in a very pure sense, simply in one place and then in a completely different one because of ~~magic~~. It’s not that this is a bad base, but you have to be really cognizant of the fact that any emotional congruency in story building becomes way harder, and you have to handle that appropriately!

I have been praising thus far that The Watcher has been heavily leaning into it’s disconnectedness and foreignness, which I still think IS a really good base to elicit a similar first-playthrough feel. All good choices. But if it STAYS there, then that foreignness has nowhere to live; I am simply floating and I continue floating. I am told that these strange lands don’t care about me, and because they are so foreign I don’t care about them either. Perfect for giving the player a “misplaced” vibe. But in large doses, what happens is that the player is continually JUST experiencing lands that they think are cool but that they still fundamentally “don’t care” about and have no connection to.

A large part of why I loved Rain World was that I was experiencing flashes of strange lands, but I was told that the lands were my home, I was told to get familiar with them. I was told all this is around you, has been around you, and will continue to be around you. But if you take that familiarity away in the first 3 hours and DON’T give it back, then the player is left with JUST flashes of strange lands. It becomes less an intimate-emotional journey through a warped world, and instead it simplifies to a slideshow of pretty backgrounds that you’re flipping through for the sake of seeing the next background.

I AM holding out hope that perhaps the story act structure is just on a much longer timescale (in-game time-wise) than I had thought, but given that people say it’s only abt ~20 hours of content and I don’t think I’m THAT far behind, I’m nervous!



A few things simultaneously. This will be my most “Watcher Review :3” type entry yet. First, I learned incidentally (after doing some supposed-to-be-unrelated Rain World research) that The Watcher is, in some significant part, a collection of community made modded regions from after the base game/Downpour with some tweaks. I’m honestly really not sure how to feel about this. The community is evidently very divided on it. It does make the formula make a lot more sense though - everybody’s mods WERE completely unrelated, and so the disconnectedness of The Watcher makes a little more sense now from a dev perspective. I would hope that there is something extra that the developers added to each region, or the overall story, that would tie the regions together better than just this sort of ad-hoc “coastal” theme going on.

Secondly, I just saw some superkarma survivor scav walking around. They had like a yellow helmet and cape and were glowing?? Fucking awesome. Immediately put me into the first-playthrough mode of genuinely not knowing what the fuck this thing “was” or what I “should do” with them. I have noticed that karma flowers seem to have a particular weight in this mod (considering there will often be dedicated “out-of-the-way” paths SPECIFICALLY just to lead you to a karma flower) but like a dumbass I have been going around EATING them. I want to trade one with this guy.

But that’s besides the larger point here. Rain World is an amazing vehicle for THAT sort of experience - seeing some strange creature and genuinely not having any clue what their significance is, to an extent that it feels more like the open-ended curiosity of meeting some new animal in real life rather than the closed curiosity of seeing a new puzzle game element. Since it IS just a game it’s kind of impossible for it not to degrade into the second over time, but it is REALLY remarkable that it manages to pull that first one off at all. Because when you meet someone new irl, or see some new strange animal in real life, there is not really a thought of “what does this thing do” and/or “what can i do with it?” There is just an open confusion about what the existence of this thing means for you, in any interpretation that could mean at the time. Rain World somehow manages to bring that very real-life feeling of curiosity and evoke it inside of the game, which is SO cool!

Third. I definitely underestimated the devs lollll. RIGHT after the previous entry, they pull their third act (assuming first act was devolving Rain World, second act was beginning to wander around between portal dimensions) where you are placed into purple rot land after meeting the echo INSIDE the portal dimensions. Revealing a second larger meta karma system is FIREEEE. It was actually a really cool experience to suddenly hear that familiar OAOAOAOA laugh echoing in the middle of random cargo in the shrouded coast? Sound design did it’s job because I INSTANTLY recognized what it meant, and I INSTANTLY dropped whatever mission I was on to go find the echo. Not only was their wordless storytelling device playing it’s part by giving me relevant information without a single explicit word, but they also set it up well enough not just to make me care about it, but make me actively seek it out when I knew it was near. Because, in this strange world of portals, this echo actually becomes the MOST familiar thing, even despite how foreign a concept it represents for us. As far as we are concerned this echo is the “cause” of the purple rot and the “cause” of us being lost in these strange dimensions, but putting a player in the position where they actually go seek it out because it becomes comforting is realllyyyy cool.

Also, side note. Love how they portray echoes in this DLC. It’s not that I disagreed with the philosophy behind their ethereal godhood musings in the base game/downpour, but if I’ll be honest, I thought it was overdone and cheesey at times. Looking at you subterranean echo, you start off with the iconic “a little beast!” and then immediately throw out the most chungus fucking fakelines I’ve ever heard. Anyway, I really like the slight-insanity spin they put on this echo (and the fact that you are clearly meeting the same echo in different spots) rather than the nostalgic larger-than-life ultra-sane angle they went for with every other echo previously.



I can’t describe the feeling that being in Unfortunate Evolution just gave me. Actual lovecraftian terror. (*proceeds to describe it*)

I don’t actually have many words for it. (*proceeds to have words for it*). I let myself feel what the slugcat felt - minus, thank god, the fear for my life and physical wellbeing - and all I really had was terror. No plan, no structured thoughts, no recognition. I was thinking recently about the concept of being “frozen” in fear. I can think of times I froze, and was scared, but I never really felt like I was so scared that I was unable to move. This is often because my fear was inspired by something rooms over that I wanted to hear, so the “freeze” came hand in hand with “being quiet so I could hear what was happening” sort of thing. I could move if I wanted to.

In Unfortunate Evolution, I myself in my body was not frozen in fear. But I felt closer to it than I ever have before. Not even an ice cold fear necessarily - just a complete numbing terror.

It of course brings many questions in my mind afterwards. I’ll probably list them below for posterity sake. But in the moment there is absolutely no recognizeable framework I could use to understand what is going on. It is an entirely new experience in about the scariest way possible. There is no other life anywhere - his entire can is an overtly dead, dark place. There are no lights, no sounds. It is absurdly absurdly dead, in a way I have never experienced before. This is especially riding off all of your previous experiences with Five Pebbles. Regardless of whether you like him or not, his can becomes something familiar. Something which is, in a “good” way or not, bustling with life and activity and lights and sounds and small organisms. It is always rich.

But it is never silent, and it is never dark. Not like this. Corpses of rot line the walls, but they are calcified and dead. Something about seeing Five Pebble’s can like this inspires a sort of dread. An iterator can does not go completely empty for anything - in fact, you have seen cans actively failing and being overtaken many times, but there are still always throes of light being thrown and beeping and whirring. Even when collapsed in Downpour, it thrived with scavengers and lizards. Without realizing it, it has become unimaginable to you to see the can absolutely dead and dark and silent. And so to suddenly be there - especially in this environment the world has conjured of incomprehensible otherworldly decay - in a completely still and dark can, is immediately unsetting in a very eerie way. Specks of dust flying around add to this a lot - it is not newly silent. For some reason, something has kept anything from getting inside, even small creatures or bugs, even given how defunct it is. It’s genuinely unnatural for something to have been this dark, this quiet, for this long. You immediately feel like prey and you are waiting to find what the singular awful threat is.

You wonder about Five Pebbles and you feel awful for him. You wonder if he was the first being to go. You wonder if he had to sit and watch this *thing*, whatever it is, take over his structure. Stuck in his room, defenseless, only able to wait and watch it come towards him. You wonder if the thing IS him. You notice that the antigravity is still working - it had been flickering in the past, when the can was being overtaken. But it is strong and steady now. It bring images of Five Pebbles being overtaken by parasites - perhaps just one - sucking his life force to keep the antigrav working. Or there is just such a warping of the world here that the dead can doesn’t matter. The ramifications don’t matter - this specific paragraph is very “Rain World” heavy, but the important part is that every part about what you see screams to you that something is wrong, something is really wrong.

And then through peepholes you see something whizz past, unfathomably bigger than you, and faster. It becomes hard to even compare yourself to it because of how big this thing is, but it is still so obscured it’s hard to make it out. All you know is that it DOES exist, and you found it, and you can only really hope to make it past without it seeing. You want to hide from it you want to hide from it you want to hide from it.

And then, you have to float through that abyss of a room. Seeing those raw metal girders stretching BACKWARDS into this huge yawning black space. This inconceivably large room - you are INSIDE a structure that has this huge of a footprint. it feels unnatural, especially to have it all hollowed out at once. And you have to cross it - the most “out in the open” you could possibly be. There are no small rooms to hide in anymore, there is just one empty room where any eyes could see you. And this thing flies past again. It is hard to keep your eyes on it, you only get impressions of a size you can’t understand. I write this paragraph poorly, as the feeling fades, but it is here that I felt closest to genuinely being paralyzed by fear that I have ever felt. In this unnaturally dead space, completely out in the open, unable to move (antigrav), in front of gaping abyss so large you cannot see the other end. And this THING, you know you are entirely within it’s nest, passing by you again and again. It doesn’t seem to see you, but that doesn’t stop the genuine terror. You can’t understand anything that is happening, and you have no way to move to do anything. You can only sit there burning single-mindedly with the desperate wish to be anywhere fucking else.

The Rain World creators are so incredible with their ability to tell such charged emotional stories through environments alone. I cannot give them enough praise.



I’m a little further in now, enough to say pretty definitively that yes this is epic. I’ve gone to enough regions now that it starts to feel LESS disconnected actually. I am noticing enough patterns that the place has become more familiar just in the fact that there’s beginning to be a continuity. I’ve been to Cold Storage before, but only now do i know it connects to Aether Ridge. There are distinct areasa that match together - some always have rain. Some are all desert themed. Some are all coastal. Even though I am not physically walking through a connected map, I have been to enough places that I at least know they ARE connected.

And the mysteries continue to unfold even while some are answered. The rifts with the different symbols I kept going to but not being able to open - I am pretty sure that’s just a karma gated thing. And yet, why is the purple rot outline spreading across different regions? Why has the echo stopped talking to me? What are these beautiful glowing golden orbs? What the FUCK kind of place is Outer Rim?

One thing I will say is that it prompts me to play erratically. I usually like going through places methodically, and historically this is what I liked about Rain World. I would enter a region, and explore ~~most~~ of it before moving on to another one, unless I didn’t like it and/or there was an obvious flowing branch point to take. But even with the newfound “connectedness” of The Watcher, something about the portals and the fact that you quickly, easily, and often can simply “teleport” somewhere else invokes me to do it. I am in one region for two cycle, then in another for one, then in another for two, etc. It has become harder to have extended stays within each region. My existence feels flickering, and it is becoming harder to keep track of the web.

The little 3D map thing has become crowded, and more valuable still. It was nice to have it before, but it’s necessary now.



Just finished The Watcher - by which I mean, the credits rolled. I will still go back to visit a few more regions and such (namely Daemon (looks cool) and notably Desolate Tract (which was the entire reason for me beginning to play Rain World months ago yet I haven’t even visited yet)). Not sure how I feel about the ending yet. It felt… kind of flat.

[[note: this is abt the Spinning Top ending. I didn’t even KNOW there were different endings when I got this one]]

It ends with The Watcher watching (hehohaoheaohe) a lot of other people exit, including the echo it had been following all this time deciding to seemingly let itself go after all these years and pass on. And then we go to a room (no idea who’s, maybe the room of Spinning Top when it was alive? idk?) and play with some toys and then bam end of game. I did like the feeling of being in a small bedroom and moving around toys, it was fun and calming, albeit in a very “society forward” way that the entire game - not just base game but Downpour and the rest of The Watcher included - never touched upon once, which admittedly was a little jarring.

My biggest critique has ended up being what was originally my biggest praise; the disconnectedness of it all. In the previous entry I stated that it started to feel even a little more connected because I started to get a sense of a continuous landscape I was crossing rather than completely different dimensional pockets - for example, Aether Ridge and Cold Storage and The Surface. While it was “pretty cool” to realize I was walking over a continuous world, it then made the disconnectedness make little sense.

When it had started by feeling disconnected, I figured “that was the point”, and so was enjoying the feeling of flitting infrequently between lands and figuring out this ethereal connection between them all. But once the game started kind of halfheartedly offering landscape connections between regions, it just made me question what the purpose of being so disconnected was if the game was going to show me that the land actually WAS connected? It feels somewhat unnecessary, even as cool as it is, to move between areas via portals when multiple regions are obviously right next to each other.

And my next complaint is the game style that it seems to promote, specially late game. By which I mean it seems to want you to flicker rapidly between sections. The fact that the extremities of each region are usually portals means that there is little reason to fully explore any region before moving on to another - as soon as you see a portal you may as well enter it, since you’ll likely be randomly teleported back to this region soon enough anyway in a different spot that allows you to explore that southeast corner you never got to anyway.

Also etc region quality control, this is no new critique for a reason; some regions seem like the best I’ve ever seen in the game, and others kind of have no spark and make me want to take the first portal I see, even despite my best efforts to sit and calm down and “appreciate the environment”. Some regions are just… not engaging at all. Fetid Glen, Turbulent Pump, Salination - because these regions don’t exist in a larger landscape the only impetus for you to explore is to find more portals, or if you just really like the region. There are no shortage of portals at all, and in some of the regions (i.e. those listed above) there’s no incentive to explore the full area because it’s obvious that less care was put into them than others.

It really felt like there was no reason to have THIS MANY regions. Even besides the disconnectedness etc etc, at a certain point, it just becomes overwhelming and it’s hard to try and stay and maintain any personal connection with any region if the game so obviously wants you to leap towards every portal you see.

It’s not that I dislike exploration in The Watcher, but the terms of engagement between you and the land is so tenuous and fleeting that it’s hard to want to explore. There is little benefit now to exploring aside from if you really like a region and want to see more of that region specifically. This is in large part due to the fact that the land doesn’t sit in a larger connected whole, so you are not exploring to learn more about the area around you - you’d be exploring to learn more about the self contained ecosystem you find yourself in at that moment, without it leading to anything else or becoming part of a larger whole.

As such, the main distillation of why you would explore any one region is to essentially “see the sights” and get the vibes. This, already, is only part of the reason Rain World was so good at promoting exploration, where you got a better sense of “your home” when doing it. Now, you only see more rooms in whatever region you’re in, which sounds similar but FEELS a whole lot different and less weighty.

And in a space where the main reason for exploration is now all the pretty sights, The Watcher seems to be okay with many of it’s regions just being “alright”, or just serving pseudo lore purposes. Aether Ridge already was a great sightseeing place when I first got dropped into it, meaning Cold Storage is really only there for lore purposes and The Surface seems to have no point at all, since it’s just more of the base Aether Ridge aesthetic without a whole lot else.

tldr the main impetus for exploration in The Watcher is aesthetics with no personal meaning attached, and then they went mid on the aesthetics for some of the regions, meaning some regions have no reason to be explored.



I have come out The Watcher karma system (not that I was every really off it, besides the later karma coming in REALLY fast). Or, more accurately, I like that there aren’t karma gates anymore. There are just portals that you can (almost) always go through

//////

Sorry what?



My thoughts on The Watcher, looking back after about a month and a half out from my half-finished playthrough.

As far as regions go, the one that sticks in my head the most is Rusted Wrecks. I actually find myself thinking about it often in nostalgia and wishing I could climb over it again. Incredibly well designed region aesthetically - and, honestly, structurally. Coral Caves fills a similar part in my mind actually -no particular “reason” to visit it again, yet I wish I could walk around in it again anyway. I still wish to touch Torrential Railways again, and Aether Ridge of course remains an all star in my mind, although even though I remember it as the “best region” I nevertheless am looking forward to other regions more. Perhaps this is because of it being diluted by being split into multiple different regions. Outer Rim, while I don’t think I’d enjoy being there now any more than I did the first time, I have nevertheless grown to appreciate it more as a setting piece. It’s just so sick, and the name is striking.

Verdant waterways also sticks in my head, but not necessarily for being a great region I want to revisit, just a unique one.

Salination leaves almost no trace besides the name and the vague impression of a room - neither the surface or most any of the other Aether Ridge extensions. Cold Storage is unique just for the mindstate it put me in, same as Unfortunate Evolution. I haven’t touched Desolate Tract or Daemon yet, which I suppose is notable since I anticipate liking them a lot.

The whole disappearing/special ability system… remains about as it was - core and integral to The Watcher experience, fun to use, although it’s not what’s driving me to want to come back nearly as much as the environments.

The whole purple rot thing occupies a similar part (core and integral, but not what makes me want to revisit it) although to be completely fair I did not interact with it much, nor have I visited The Prince (who I know little about, besides them being another ending involved with the purple rot).

None of this matters too much. I honestly started writing this purely because I want to visit Rusted Wrecks again lmfao.



So far the new Watcher update has just been Watcher but part 2 deluxe. I suppose it helps that I just visited two of the coolest fucking regions here (desolate tract and turbulent pumps) after seeing the Prince (?) for the first time. But like this has been a phenomenal comeback so far.

Desolate Tract I ofc did like a lot, which I’m glad it lived up to my expectations bc I allowed myself to get my expectations really high for the region. A screenshot of Desolate Tract was what got me into Rain World initially earlier this year, I literally saw a screenshot all the way from The Watcher before any of the base game, and from there started playing. So almost in a way finally visiting Desolate Tract was a homecoming for me almost. The period of time in my life getting struck by a picture of The Watcher’s environment before I knew anything about the base game was revisited all the way on the other side of the history that had built up between me and the game since.

I will however allow myself an analytical nitpick; I’m so sad that they put one of those green fruits in the middle of the region. I think it would have been SO COOL if the entire region COMPLETELY had no food. It would feel so much more real - I actually think it would be cool to introduce a region that forces players to engage with the starve mechanic. I have only touched it once or twice, in extreme circumstances; I simply don’t have a reason to most of the time. What region is going to give me that circumstance MORE than the literal DESOLATE TRACT??? Like… sister. You got TELEPORTED to the DESOLATE. TRACT. You think you’re gonna find food there and EAT? The *NAME* is “DESOLATE”. If you are going to get through that region yeah it makes sense you should literally have to starve yourself to get through.

Turbulent Pumps was phenomenal honestly. I haven’t even seen the whole thing yet, but I love what they did with it. The physical structure is unique and charming; the gameplay is as well. The color palette is so cool it makes it very immersive as an ecosystem, you believe the size of the machinery they’re trying to construct via the terrain. Plus the gameplay is super fun and I love those little hornet lizards.

The little purply things that swim at you have been really cool actually. I didn’t play with end-game watcher long enough in my first playthrough to actually encounter the big ones that swim at you and try to kill you (presumably, I haven’t been bested yet). I like suddenly having a reason to be afraid of this new power I got, rather than just having limitless power all the time. I do still think the floating is so incredibly overpowered. It unfortunately FITS so well that I don’t even necessarily want it changed, but if you use it it starts to so fundamentally change how often you use it in jumps and such. I think you should be able to start spawning things even if you don’t have max karma, and even if you didn’t actually complete the transition. That, mixed with the fact that “accidentally going too far” might spawn this ethereal death entity WOULD make you less likely to cheaply rely on it in parkouring, thus making you interact with the actual terrain more.

One thing I always thought was a little disappointing about the increasing karma of the Watcher is that everything after the first three felt so uneventful, except to hear more of the echo’s dialogue (which, to be fair, they did a great job with this time. mostly!). yes ofc I got more powers, but it just felt like… idk I was like powering up and becoming godly, or spiritually. It certainly felt aesthetically like something dark and mysterious, but… I was never given a reason to be scared of it. I was just limitlessly unlocking new abilities. Only now, that I get to “fully transition” at max karma (or so I think?) have I unlocked the ability to spawn these ephemeral death worms that make me realize that this alternate plane of existence is not exactly something friendly that wants me there.

In all this is a really small nitpick, esp since one you reach max karma the first time or whatever the trigger is the effect is the same. I just think having a gradual introduction woulda fit so nicely with theming. Unless, of course, I have fundamentally misunderstood something abt how they implemented the mechanic.



Oh. And I will also say. I loved Ancient Urban way more coming back to it this revisit than I did encountering it for the first time. The aesthetic grew on me a lot, and I’m a lot more willing to accept the sudden “ancient society” arc than before.



One thing I DO appreciate about The Watcher is how many creatures got added that aren’t enemies, they are just creatures alongside me. I like being in company.



Ok confirmed The Watcher is fucking awesome. I just got to Daemon for the first time… and it’s IN THE MIDDLE of the map?? HELLO THAT’S SO FUCKING SICK??? I was already really invested in Daemon just by the sheer virtue of how ethereal and alien the place was, plus it gave me… words? Hints? Clues? There’s a secret path that I couldn’t go through? But then on the map it shows it as the unmoving CENTER of the 3D map-sphere. The Watcher KEEPS challenging expectations in so many different ways, I think they did a really good job of turning the established Rain World status quo on its head so that even experienced players are thrown into something new and unforeseen past just “oh I haven’t seen that type of lizard before :3”

The map IS getting really cluttered though… did they NEED this many new regions?? Like for real. I know new regions are always exciting. But like… you specifically created this ingenous 3D map sphere thing to alleviate navigation frustrations and allow a large number of regions to be displayed at once… and then you proceed to overload it with so many regions that it eventually gets too cramped to read clearly ANYWAY?? It’s not that I think the map should be reworked to be clearer, I think that having all these gd regions is a little bit ridiculous, hot take perhaps I know. Not even necessarily remove any (although there are some I personally would not mind saying bye to), but it seems like there are many that could just be conglomerated into one (notably the Aether Ridge ones!)

I know combining them would unbalance the scales that the map has ever-so-delicately balanced, and would mess up exploration, I’m not saying that’s a perfect solution. I guess tldr I find the sheer number of regions to be a little obnoxious, both in that it gets in the way of the player getting intimately familiar with most of them, but ALSO in that it hurts map legibility.



Just saw some sort of ethereal Golden Dragon, it talked to me about raindrops (I think same text from some Watcher promo material) and then disappeared… reminding me a lot more of echoes from the base game than any of the new speaking entities I have experience in Watcher thus far. Which is to say, for me personally, I felt its words were contrived and a little stupid because they were just so abstract so as not to actually mean anything. If I’m honest I CERTAINLY thought it was cool, but I was actually more impressed with the dream that it unlocked afterwards than with the dragon itself.

(It also left a GOLD portal that I COULDN’T EVEN GO THROUGH??? >:( WHAT)

The dream was pretty simple, consisting of a series of images of Watcher running along small bridges or outcroppings in various different places (some of them vaguely recognizeable, some of them new) and then ending with this scene of Watcher looking at what looked like two “forces” of some sort meeting water-twister style in the middle of this vast ring of their energies - almost like being sucked into a point.

This honestly struck me as revealing more about what The Watcher “is about” than anything that came before it, especially the “intro” section of the memory. It gave a very distinct impression of wandering helplessness; of Watcher traversing lands without understanding why, of seeing new world after new world without knowing them. It felt much more like my own actual experience of The Watcher than any of the story that has been introduced in the DLC has felt like. The parallel they were making - Watcher exploring countless new lands without any self purpose or agency in the wider landscape, and me exploring countless new regions without any direction or agency in their going-ons - felt much more natural than anything they’ve pulled thus far, in part due to it’s simplicity. In all reality, nothing much HAS happened in Watcher besides me going around and viewing the world as it sits in its multitudinous different states. A complete bystander, albeit one unwillingly coming to know and possess strange powers.

I guess yeah I’m moved by finally seeing something that actually feels grounded in the experience of moving through these regions, but I’m also moved by the “admittance” of the devs of their purpose; bringing me back to the experience of being a small creature in a large world. This DLC is notably more “ethereal” in flavor than the base game was, but the base essence/philosophy of each are distinctly similar (as opposed to the goal of Downpour).

The forlornness and loneliness and isolation felt in this Watcher dreams feels similar to, but distinct from, the loneliness portrayed in the original Rain World, and I am really happy that the emotion of all mechanics and locations introduced in this DLC firmly support it. The Watcher feels emotionally cohesive, much more than Downpour.

Also… I like that fully switching dimensions or whatever when you use the stealth thing at max karma makes you drop your items. Trading off real-world danger for ethereal danger PLUS losing your items is a good balance I feel.



One other thing I also want to note, although I’ve kind of talked about it already. I really appreciate that Watcher isn’t “gaining mastery” over these new super powers it’s getting, and instead seems to incidentally be able to wield them. This means most in relation to my experience in Downpour.

In Downpour, it felt like the slugcats were meant to have control over the world at large in some sense, via their supernatural abilities either in movement or killing or elsewise. That, combined with the stories they were placed within (delivering critical information, killing kings, etc) made them seem very important, as though they were large players amongst the characters that existed in the world.

The Watcher has done an incredibly good job of NOT doing this; I still feel as though Watcher is weak and unconnected from the wider happenings of the world, even as I gain the ability to disappear and float and open portals. I still don’t know what these gods are, or these dragons, or these ethereal worm things. I have powers, but I am scared of them because I am not in control of them. I cannot enter this darkpurple ripple dimension without being attacked by the beings on the other side. Whenever I use my abilities, a ring broadcasts itself out around me, almost similar to how the superscavs broadcast their yellow rings.

What this tells me is that these are not MY powers, I’m simply entering into an established plane of magic that many other beings can also access. I am very much coming into contact with some sort of magic system that I CANNOT CONTROL, I just incidentally am able to use it. I don’t control when and where these portals appear (at least, not any of the stable ones), I am simply able to use them. Sometimes they don’t let me through, sometimes I must become more attuned to enter them.

Ok this is a pretty convoluted entry here. I guess what I’m saying is that somehow in some way, Watcher feels incredibly like a background character in the lands it is traversing. Even despite the powers I have, I somehow still feel small, helpless, scared, and unimportant. Unlike in Downpour, having these powers is not a prize; having these powers only opens me to the knowledge of an entirely new world in which I STILL don’t matter.



YO I WAS SO HARSH ON FETID GLEN bc i didn’t actually even explore it my first playthrough past like 3 rooms. THAT PLACE IS SO FUCKING COOL HELLO??? I LOVE FETID GLEN!