Said The Ice

(( note: unfinished and unpolished writing piece ))

=======================

A woman, sick of her own mind in the hours after her mother’s death, runs to the woods on a chilly December evening. She comes to a stream, wipes out a seat for herself in the snow, and sits down weeping.

A voice is heard. “Oh woman, why do you cry?”

The woman has her head held in her hands. An early quiet shrouds her as she crouches against the treeline, facing ice.

Her voice comes alone, haltingly; “My mother has died. The sorrow is great, but easy to bear compared to the fear I feel.”

“Fear for what?” asks the voice.

The woman’s fingers clench in her hair, and she presses the heel of her palms into her eyes. “Fear for my death. She has died of old age, and she never stood a chance, fighter as she was. The same will happen to me, no matter the cause. I am temporary.” A sob wracks through her.

Again, the voice; “Like your mother?”

A nod. The woman collects her knees to her chest and buries her eyes against her crossed arms. Short hiccups of air relay her sobs to the trees around her.

And a pause, long enough for the woman to collect herself and hear the next words. “And what is so awful of fear? Is it not one of the joys of being alive - one of the joys brought to you by that very temporariness?”

The woman releases a hand from her head to wave it through the air emphatically. “Please, I know this. I have no shortage of appreciation. I relish the fear, just as I have relished sorrow. Fear is a small and simple word for my feelings toward my death, but fear I feel nonetheless; there will come an end to my appreciation, at the moment of my death”

“How do you know you will not still be able to appreciate after your death?”

The woman looks up at this, to lay eyes on the speaker. Her hands fall to huddle against her body. “Who are you?”

In a voice crackling and crystalline: “I am the ice before you. I am the river. I am the cold.”

The woman fixes her eyes on the thin crack-fragile layer of ice anchored to the sandy shore. “And what do you know of death?” she demands, eyes ringed red. Her hands, wretched things bright pink, cling to each other.

The ice does not speak, for a long time. The woman hears only a tinny babbling of currents, miniaturized by the timidity of the winter wind. And cracking white mist. And finally: “I am snow beneath you. I am the chill in your hands. I am the water.”

Her eyes have become severe, guarded, her posture rigid. “Is this your answer, or a game? I realize you have no responsibility to listen to the frights of a creature like myself, but neither do you have the right to mock me with your belabored points of identity. You are not the only one privy to such ego.”

The voice responds at once; “Show me.”

The woman blinks, awestruck. “I am a body; I am low to the ground and dextrous and compelled to explore. I am a mind. I am an involuntary and constant collection of thoughts, a string of memories that holds itself dear, and compelled to learn.”

[[[her reaction is too intense too soon here]]]

A pause. Silence. The woman is breathing heavy, irregular, necessary. Her blinks are hard.

“And I am scared to die. I will lose myself one day. The memories that I cannot help but cherish, whether they be delightful or awful, will not only be released from recollection but there will be no mind with which to recollect them ever again. I have no issue with dancing while I am alive, I know these moments will never mean more than they do now. But it terrifies me to think that one day, these moments will have nobody to appreciate them. I will lose everything that I am, and with that, everything that I consider to be a part of me will lose itself too. It is not just me losing the world, it is the world losing itself.”

The woman gasps, as if struck at once with a heavy blow. Her eyes shut with force and her hands curl until stuck, painful to watch, into grasping claws.

“My mother- she carried within her a trove of meaning neither I nor anyone else in the world would ever be able to appreciate. Because we are not her. She was the only thing anchoring those moments to this world. Important, intimate memories like mine or yours, that we knew nothing about but they at least had a home with her. All gone at once. They have not just floated away, they have been erased where they stood. Not only could nothing bring them back, but there is not a single thing in the entire world that would care enough to get them back, not even myself, her own daughter, because they were important and known to her and her only. Neither I nor you can pretend we care enough about her version of events to learn what she knew and how she knew it when it takes an entire lifetime to care about our own.”

The woman’s hands are shaking now, and she swallows hard, around a stinging lump in a throat stretched like taffy. Her chin is trembling, and she continues speaking, punctuated by quiet hiccups and sobs.

“It isn’t fair. I know that fairness has no home in so random and uncoordinated a thing as the universe at large, but it is not fair regardless. I cannot fathom why I must be subject to it, besides blind inevitability. I cannot think why else. But to necessitate for it to end, as without end it wouldn’t be considered life, is a cruel punishment to impose upon something that did not ask for that very life in the first place.”

Her fingers, seemingly despite themselves, manage to finish curling themselves into taut fists. Her next words are practically spat, even as her eyes shut tighter, as though disgusted and embarrassed by the hurt issuing from her mouth.

“I ask you about death as though you know of it. You are ice. You cannot know how a human loves, you cannot know warmth. These things are nothing but faraway ideas to you - I live them. I am forced to. You cannot know what it is like to see a life fade from you, you cannot know the finality with which everybody must at last drop their instrument after a life of music. You cannot ever know our gatherings of community and cannot know what it is like to know they won’t last, to know that you won’t last. You cannot know what it is like to die.”

She understands this feeling is unjust, that she is wildly seeking repentance from the world for her lot. She understands that just as she holds her identity solid, so too does the ice, and death must be awful to it in turn. But this only intensifies her fright, brings with it guilt, in a way that crowds her thinking with dripping images of self flagellation and martyrdom and much-hoped-for pity. Even more dangerously, with hope for pardon. Her involuntary feet begin to uncertainly lift and lower themselves in place, as though preparing for flight or tantrum. An indescribable measure of expansion begins in her head, as though she will burst, and her human instincts have not prepared her for whether she should cry out or clutch at her skull.

“Sit.”

The voice cuts through the silent panic; the woman finds herself obliged to obey. She lowers herself down to the ground, again wiping it clear of snow by habit.

The currents of the stream still emit the same chilly chattering, but the woman recognizes it now with familiarity. Her eyes alight on branches that have hung near her since she first arrived, and she cannot bring herself to look away, as though steadying herself on a listing ship. She notes, dimly, how the snow around her must be made of the same flakes it was when her mother died only hours before.

The thought brings with it a confusing tonic of security and injustice.

A flock of geese flies overhead. One in the front, three in formation making up the left wing, and two on the right. A call from one cuts through the landscape - a loud, suddenly raucous blast of sound that hits all the same the woman, the ice, and the trees surrounding them.

“This is an awful thing you have described,” comes finally the crackling voice from the bank.

The woman does not speak. It is her turn to remain silent. Her poor pulsing body has been denied the explosion it seemed to have desired, and now deflates quickly. Shame is wrapped thick around her tongue, a forlorn helplessness around her forehead.



[[a paragraph on not feeling shame for enduring what living things must endure. Largely from previously written passage from months ago, in Best Passages]]



The words she hears, almost unexpectedly, intensify her tears in quite a different way than what evoked them before. They no longer feel forced out, rather allowed to escape.

“You tell me that I know nothing of death. By this, you tell me I know nothing of experience. Death only comes to what can experience, and what can experience must die. I live a very different world than you do, woman, but I live in it nonetheless; for I experience it in a way I only can. A way that you cannot know.”

The ice, well-anchored but thin, hovers a small ways above the stream. The water level had receded and left the frozen outcropping suspended in memoriam of the stream the banks used to know.

“I know of long nights - the full extent of them, for I do not sleep to pass the hours. I know the landscape dark and tittering for far longer than it is bright. I know only passerby, and a looming depth below me. I know the suffocating grace of rainfall. I know the fear of what may break me. I know days as threats. I know a sunset to be a major life event - I have only known three so far, and likely will not pass another.”

The woman blinks. She had not considered how large an event a single day much be for the river. She is surprised, and surprised that she feels surprised.

“But you are right. I do not know the human death. I do not know the feeling of a community. I do not know warmth, and music to me is wholly different from the instruments you imagine. I can never know what your body feels when it cries, when it screams. I know why your hands shake in red tones of chill, but I do not know what it feels like.”

A pause. The ice seems to thin, seems to become clearer. Approaching glass, not frost. The woman remains still, eyes fixed intently on the bubbles trapped within the frozen crystals.

“But I do know my own death. I know that, even if I don’t have a heart to cease beating, I nevertheless have a life to lose. I have experiences and memories that I, too, hold dear. I speak to you now in a language you understand - a human language - but it is not what I live. I know a language much more volatile, much more raw, much less extricable from my environment, but a language nonetheless. While I can’t know what it is like to feel your fear, to lose your language, I do know what it is like to feel my fear, to lose my language.”

The crackling of the voice of ice takes on a lower pitch. It sounds, somehow, more muffled.

“You know this - see your heart, as easily as you can see through my body. I do not know what labels you put on the world, and I do not know what the substance of the world that you attempt to bundle beneath those labels means to you. But you, nevertheless, try desperately to point at patterns and meaning in the world you know via your words. I, too, have patterns and meaning I understand in the world, and upon which I put my own labels. I know a type of fear as well; my fear is personal to me just as your fear is personal to you.”

Here, there is a long silence. The woman has nothing to say. Her brows are drawn together in a slight gesture of concern, as though instincts to comfort were activated despite herself. Those wounded cannot help but understand the similarly wounded, regardless of what action that recognition prompts. For now, it is a respectful quiet.

The sun is higher in the sky, and the mist has cleared. Sunbeams now hit the land. The air feels none the warmer, yet the woman is grateful for the mild heat on her hands. The banks glitter, brightly, speckled. Each pinpoint of light dancing into the sun seems a different eye of the frozen shelf, suspended over streaming water and looking around at the bank with calm intent.

“My death will come quickly, decisively, and altogether. My death will be clearly delineated, as the last solid crystal melts into liquid. My death is accompanied by a shortening, a shrinking - and, above all else, drenched and saturated. Not drowned by depth, or submersion, but drowned from within. Covered in my own blood. It will be beautiful, but to me, it is horrific. And it will feel much, much different than yours.”

The glittering of the ice, unknown to the woman, is tears. The ice is crying steadily, without a change in voice.

“Woman, we do not share a death. We are not both visited by the same specter, we do not both face the same end. The ending of my life is wholly and drastically different from the ending of yours. The lead up will be far different, the moment of death will be far different, and all moments after will be far different. This is not because I am ice and you are human; consider how unconquerably unique your life is compared even to those humans around you. No, we do not all meet the same death; we all meet a unique, personal end. We all call this death, but it is shared by label only; the moment is one we all experience quite differently.”

- how does the ice know that the moments after death will be different from each other?
- Brings to mind the concept of when death is accepted, for there must be a moment it is accepted, otherwise it could never happen. That is the nature of the inevitable - either you invite it yourself, or relent to it, but nevertheless at some point you allow it.



“What do you know of your death?” comes finally the crackling voice from the bank.

The woman is subjected to a quick flash of the same anger, terror, as she felt previous. She is able to let it perish in its cradle this time.

“I know that I will be gone. I know death as an endless phone ringing, one that nobody alive has ever picked up. I know death as a silence on the other end of the phone, and I know death as the inability to put down the phone once answered”

The woman sniffs, and wipes at her nose with her sleeve. She begins to breathe through her mouth, and pushes her hands into the pockets in her thick jacket.

“I know death as the moment in which everything I have ever done will simultaneously and completely be proven to have meant nothing. I know that everything I have ever experienced, every feeling and every conception and every assurity and unassurity are inevitably contained within this small bubble of temporal experience only the live are able to know. I know that while I am inside this bubble, the bubble is everything to me, and thus to lose it is to lose everything I am.”

[[ice points out via bubble analogy that living is nothing but a continued series of deaths, and that “death” is just another one of those moments. Points about how the woman’s life now did not matter at all to the woman 3 hours ago, and does not matter - is not real - to the woman three hours in the future. In the same vein, just as life now hardly matters to the life of the future, life also matters naught to the dead.]]

“I find no comfort in the thought that life matters naught to the dead. I do not look forward to the idea that my frights now will not matter to me then, however true that may be, because I am not dead but instead alive and worried now.”

“It doesn’t sound like you are afraid of your death, then. It sounds as though you are afraid of all the moments after your death. It sounds like you are afraid of existing in a place where you are not contained within what is real and now to the world.”

[[ so are you afraid of losing the world, or losing yourself?]]

[[somehow segue to conversation about how the woman is nothing more than a collection of particular labeled understandings of the real, actual world underneath it all. Maybe by having the woman claim that there is no difference, and the ice more or less answering “precisely”]]



Woman describes death.

Ice asks what she knows of life.

She gives a description, schwhatever.

Ice points out that the words she used to describe life are different from life itself.

“So what? You asked me a question. I know a truer answer would be to remain silent, but I must attempt to point to the answer I know however insufficient the words I use to point are”



Touch on:
- we only know the bubble we are in the way we do while we are inside of it
- Death being only a lapse in communication
- No universal death that comes; everything has it’s own individual death
- What is death? Supposedly, an end to life. What is life? Not the patterns that make up the universe, but the current bundle of ego and identity that understands the patterns in a specific certain way. An end to life is not an end to the patterns
- Something something fundamental patterns of the universe as the language beyond life and death acting out the puppets of life and death
- Beings of change die and are born anew at each moment. Death is just another moment; same with all moments after death. The different is just whether you are able to to conceive of an identity between the moments or not
- Death as, simply, the moment where we stop being able to understand human-made labels in a human way. But humans are not the only life - more accurately, are not the only processes in the world.
- Everyone must accept death at some point, whether it be now or at the very moment of death
- No living being has ever, ever, known what it is like to be dead
- A moment of profound empathy from the ice. Recognizing that to lose everything you are, and to be subject to what a being who experiencing the world is naturally subject to, is at times an awful awful ordeal. That the death of the world that exists with you is a tragedy - honestly. The line about how the weight of the transgression of life must be far greater than we thought.
- Stagnation as a truer end than death ever will be. Thnk god death comes to make sure life does not overstay its welcome with repetitions



Plot (?)
- woman getting colder
- Ice eventually breaks away
- Woman talking with ice chunk while walking along the river, even as the ice grows smaller
- Ends with the woman scooping up the last sliver of ice, watching it melt into nothing, and drinking the water. She feels no different after, aside from a stringing chill in her chest.
- Woman realizes all the snowflakes ARE different. This is when the ice breaks away and begins to float. This floating is when talk of moment-to moment death occurs
- The ice melting. The woman asks “are you not more than ice? You told me you were the cold, you were the river. Will you not survive?’ And the ice responds “I am all that and more. But I am also the ice, and I am melting. I will be gone soon”
- The ice remarks that the woman had to,d her that it cannot know what it is like to die. The ice agrees; “I do not know what it is like to die, for I m still alive”. Launch into points on death being only a barrier in communication
- After woman sits down for second time, make voice note how she has taken the time to clear her seat each time. she must be enjoying [awful part of conversation]



The woman recollects on her statements earlier, that she relished the fear and sorrow. Is relishing those feelings, borne from the death of her mother, not the same as her relishing that very death?



A being of process, of change. Subject to the feelings of inadequacy against the world, of insecurity (message: you are not



The woman frantically splashes into the bank, ignoring the biting cold liquid that immediately feels to form a cast around her boots. In an act she now feels is almost sacrilegious - and, with dim awareness, she notes she would not have perceived as such just an hour prior - she reaches to the water and scoops out the floundering remainder of the ice from the river, taking it’s final moments into her world.



“But what are you doing?”

“I’m dying” said the ice



 It must not be that I have done so little to deserve the suffering borne upon me, but rather that the act of living is a far worse transgression than I thought.