The sinewey waves will let you kill yourself. Your body, falling in, does not get wet. Meat meets meat; the tendons of the ocean flex around you. Too large a body to be considered one; though surrounded by it's thousand arms, there is no feeling of kinmanship. There is no other-comfort to be gained. It's presence so large as to be absenmt, as for you to be alone. It's ligaments don't move around you, but through you. You become a cell in it's muscles, surrounded on all sides by mirror copies of yourself, contracting and releasing as you do.

The ocean becomes something you cannot help but ask questions to; not to recieve an answer, but content in the knowledge that you will recieve no response. There is safety in that silence, the unending finisher to any query posed. It is tempting to interpret the quiet indifference as an answer, and you'll find you'll often use it as such. But make no mistake, it is not an answer to you - the ocean broadcasts this to the world at large by sincerely not trying to say anything. The heave of the bosom that both nurtures and weans you is not for you; it simply must breathe.

Ocean, you are gorgeous. It's a feeling I've never had for any conceptualized thing before, made so much harder to express by knowing you will never know me. It is not unlike a child who, for the first time, has the realization that their older model human has thoughts dealing with an entirely different level of experience than they have ever faced. And yet, not like that at all - for in that realization is the knowledge that it means that level of experience can be attained - and, deeper still, it means that level has already begun to be attained.

No, there is no approaching the ocean. And, neither, is it like the no-approach of the rock or the cloud. For those things can be seen in entirety, can be considered. The concept of the word "ocean" is, in it's base form, not the whole body of water, but the size-gap-transcending experience of being one dot on the surface that looks out to see more, more, more. The expansiveness so encompassing that travelling across it feels rather like the same circle of water remains stationary around the unmoving you. The rolling texture makes it so you don't move over the water to land, but the land moves over the water to you.

And so hauntingly intangible, fragile in it's unattainability. Like trying to lift a pile of dandelion seeds all at once with tweezers. Some trick of size so the more there is, the less one's efforts to touch it seem to do anything, until it is as though punching a ghost - there is nothing there at all.

The open water is not affected all at once, like a cup of drinking water. The ocean is large, gelatinous, and continually unfolding. Boats across the water disturb only the smallest of paths, like how scissors do not cut the entire paper to tatters at once. The effect is quickly over, and the water has settled in the small area. It sits much more solid than one might imagine, a great jelly-like thing that strains at it's own surface tension from below, hoping to puncture upwards by the incessancy of it's rippling but forever remaining, ultimately, an unbroken sheet.

I have only ever experienced calm waters, and I can already tell how untameable this is. It's foolish to imagine the ocean as something sitting atop the land it hides; the ocean IS it's own land, a sucking and muscular land that forbids being built upon. It closes up on itself and heals it's own wounds.

I've been at sea in the comfiest of climates, the living quarters of luxury, for barely a week. Only 4 days, and I already know I will never forget the ocean.

We are moving quickly toward the gate. We are right now seeing it approach, seeing it unfold itself through only the reveal of slowly more and more detail. The gate does not greet us with an angelic choir, lifting chords, soaring whites and blues. The gate greets us with relative silence. The gate greets us with the hushed sound of wondering voices, of waves, of steady hum and commonplace. The gate greets us as we are and have always been. The gate allows us to decide, for otherwise it would not be the gate.

A person has so many parts of themselves they don't know - most of them, in fact. There are rolls of fat that will do what they will do. Legs are long things, the mind is incapabl;e of totalling up every spot. The backs of your shoulders scarcely recognized, not to mention any of your innards! The human body is a large, lanky, wrinkled thing to pilot, and so many portions are left to act of their own accord - even our hands we know only dimly, and our face - though so often felt - is foreer unseen! We must forgive outselves for the untamed swaths of our bodies.

The ocean is not so. The ocean is aware and in control of all it's parts at once. Every small ripple is her conscious demonstration of her body. The ocean enjoys it's body, you can tell. Cognizant and willful of every movement, layered and minute, it flexes and recoils as exactly it will. Every actioin is careful and followed through. Her attention follows you when you are near, but know you are not important to her; you enter her attention when you enter her only because she knows herself. It is all smooth muscles and autmoatic-but-accounted-for contractions; this is how she governs herself.

The ocean has no safe places; it's all her. There is no refuge, you cannot step away from a wave. Immense power comes solely from it's immense size - when you are in the ocean, you are surrendered to it. You are on something alive, more alive than any land. It doesn't encompass you, but it forms the foundation of everything of your life when you are on it. She incessantly reminds you, by feel and by sight, that you are hers.

It's peculiar to feel, to really feel, that you are not in the ocean but ON the ocean. To see, miles away, the same surface churning as right near you, like you are on a vast vast plain but cannot step onto it, inspires something like dread. Powerlessness - a feeling you don't belong, not from hostility but from inhospitality. The ocean is alive, it's currents move surface swift and unknowable deep and eyesight far. This is land, not water, but don't ler it's flatness decieve you - there are no footholds anywhere.

You have tread into the domain of a system so complex, so ancient, so assured, and you will forever be only a witness.

To it's extent and reach, there arises a strange sense of closeness. Not emotionally, but spatially, as though you and the ocean occupied the same small room. Waves miles out seem, somehow, just out of reach. The effect of  this is not empowerment, but the opposite, as though the ocean waits, stoic but internally amused, for you to travel the distance only to realize your position hasn't changes in the least.

The ocean, in this regard, presents itself as a toy. Something fake, something plastic, as though a crack in the surface will reveal it's hollowness.

It is a feeling of being on a large open plain, but there is no need to watch. There are no mountains or landmarks to look for, no trees above you, and simultaneously no predator or prey coming at you on the surface. Everything you see is entirely empty and falsely safe and lonely. Everything to concern yourself with is below the glassless waves, but you are unable to see, leaving you feeling stupidly left out and petulant, yet strangely invulnerable to threats, given the lack of any in any direction above the waves. You are left out of the great inside joke of the sea and everythin in it; beings are not meant to live on the water but under it, leaving you as a marked outsider to only interface with the door to the home itself.

It moves slowly, in a way that only something immensely large can.